The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Colleen Bawn; or, the Brides of Garryowen
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Colleen Bawn; or, the Brides of Garryowen

Author: Dion Boucicault
        Gerald Griffin

Release date: August 29, 2016 [eBook #52924]

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Henry Flower and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COLLEEN BAWN; OR, THE BRIDES OF GARRYOWEN ***




Produced by Henry Flower and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









Transcriber's Note


Italic text is indicated by _underscores_ and bold text by =equals
signs=.




  THE COLLEEN BAWN;
  OR, THE
  BRIDES OF GARRYOWEN.

  A DOMESTIC DRAMA, IN THREE ACTS.

  _BY DION BOUCICAULT, ESQ._,
  AUTHOR OF
  The Pope of Rome, The Young Actress, The Poor of New York, The Dublin
  Boy, Pauvrette, Life of an Actress, Jessie Brown, The
  Octoroon, Azael, Blue Belle,
  Dot. &c.

  PRINTED BUT NOT PUBLISHED




_Original Cast, at Miss Laura Keene’s Theater, New York, March 27th,
1860._

CAST OF CHARACTERS.--[THE COLLEEN BAWN.]


  MYLES NA COPPALEEN     Mr. Dion Boucicault.
  HARDRESS CREGAN        Mr. H. F. Daly.
  DANNY MANN             Mr. Charles Wheatleigh.
  KYRLE DALY             Mr. Charles Fisher.
  FATHER TOM             Mr. D. W. Leeson.
  MR. CORRIGAN           Mr. J. G. Burnett.
  BERTIE O’MOORE         Mr. Henry.
  HYLAND CREAGH          Mr. Levick.
  SERVANT                Mr. Goodrich.
  CORPORAL               Mr. Clarke.
  EILY O’CONNOR          Miss Agnes Robertson.
  ANNE CHUTE             Miss Laura Keene.
  MRS. CREGAN            Madam Ponisi.
  SHEELAH                Miss Mary Wells.
  KATHLEEN CREAGH        Miss Josephine Henry.
  DUCIE BLENNERHASSET    Miss Hamilton.


COSTUMES.--PERIOD, 179--.

HARDRESS.--Green broad-skirted body coat of the time; double-breasted
light silk waistcoat, leather pantaloons, top boots, hair rather long,
steeple-crowned gold-laced hat, and white muslin cravat.

_2nd Dress_: Blue body coat, white waistcoat, white kerseymere
breeches, silk stockings, and shoes.

DALY.--Brown coat, etc., same fashion as above. _2nd Dress_: Full dress.

CREAGH, O’MOORE, and GENTLEMEN.--Evening dress.

FATHER TOM.--Broad-brimmed, low-crowned hat, faded black suit, black
riding boots, and white cravat.

DANNY. [_A hunchback._] Blue frieze jacket, corduroy breeches, yellow
waistcoat, gray stockings, shoes and buckles, and old seal-skin cap.

MYLES.--Drab great coat, with cape, red cloth waistcoat, old velveteen
breeches, darned gray stockings, and shoes.

CORRIGAN.--Black suit, top boots, and brown wig.

MRS. CREGAN.--Puce silk dress of the time, white muslin neckerchief and
powdered hair. _2nd Dress_: Handsome embroidered silk dress, jewels and
fan.

ANNE.--Gold-laced riding habit, hat and vail. _2nd Dress_: White
embroidered muslin dress, and colored sash.

EILY.--Blue merino petticoat, chintz tuck-up body and skirts, short
sleeves, blue stockings, hair plain, with neat comb, red cloak, and
hood.




THE COLLEEN BAWN.




ACT I.


  SCENE I.--[_Night._]--_Torc Cregan, the Residence of Mrs. Cregan,
  on the Banks of Killarney. House_, L. 2 E.; _window facing
  Audience--light behind--light to work in drop at back. Stage open at
  back. Music--seven bars before curtain._

_Enter_ HARDRESS CREGAN, _from house_, L.

_Hard_ [_Going up_ C.] Hist! Danny, are you there?

DANNY _appearing from below, at back_.

_Danny_ Is it yourself, Masther Hardress?

_Hard_ Is the boat ready?

_Danny_ Snug under the blue rock, sir.

_Hard_ Does Eily expect me to-night?

_Danny_ Expict is it? Here is a lether she bade me give yes; sure the
young thing is never aisy when you are away. Look, masther, dear, do ye
see that light, no bigger than a star beyant on Muckross Head?

_Hard_ Yes, it is the signal which my dear Eily leaves burning in our
chamber.

_Danny_ All night long she sits beside that light, wid her face fixed
on that lamp in your windy above.

_Hard_ Dear, dear Eily! after all here’s asleep, I will leap from my
window, and we’ll cross the lake.

_Danny_ [_Searching._] Where did I put that lether?

_Enter_ KYRLE DALY _from house_, L.

_Kyrle_ [L.] Hardress, who is that with you?

_Hard_ [C.] Only Mann, my boatman.

_Kyrle_ That fellow is like your shadow.

_Danny_ [R.] Is it a cripple like me, that would be the shadow of an
illegant gintleman like Mr. Hardress Cregan?

_Kyrle_ [L.] Well, I mean that he never leaves your side.

_Hard_ [C.] And he never _shall_ leave me. Ten years ago he was a fine
boy--we were foster-brothers, and playmates--in a moment of passion,
while we were struggling, I flung him from the gap rock into the reeks
below, and thus he was maimed for life.

_Danny_ Arrah! whist aroon! wouldn’t I die for yez? didn’t the same
mother foster us? Why, wouldn’t ye break my back if it plazed ye, and
welkim! Oh, Masther Kyrle, if ye’d seen him nursin’ me for months,
and cryin’ over me, and keenin’! Sin’ that time, sir, my body’s been
crimpin’ up smaller and smaller every year, but my heart is gettin’
bigger for him every day.

_Hard_ Go along, Danny.

_Danny_ Long life t’ye, sir! I’m off.

[_Runs up and descends rocks_, C. _to_ R.

_Kyrle_ Hardress, a word with you. Be honest with me--do you love Anne
Chute?

_Hard_ Why do you ask?

_Kyrle_ Because we have been fellow-collegians and friends through
life, and the five years that I have passed at sea have strengthened,
but have not cooled, my feelings towards you. [_Offers hand._

_Enter_ MRS. CREGAN, _from house_, L.

_Hard_ [L.] Nor mine for you, Kyrle. You are the same noble fellow as
ever. You ask me if I love my cousin Anne?

_Mrs. C_ [C., _between them_.] And I will answer you, Mr. Daly.

_Hard_ [R.] My mother!

_Mrs. C_ [C.] My son and Miss Chute are engaged. Excuse me, Kyrle,
for intruding on your secret, but I have observed your love for Anne
with some regret. I hope your heart is not so far gone as to be beyond
recovery.

_Kyrle_ [L.] Forgive me, Mrs. Cregan, but are you certain that Miss
Chute really is in love with Hardress?

_Mrs. C_ Look at him! I’m sure no girl could do that and doubt it.

_Kyrle_ But I’m not a girl, ma’am; and sure, if you are mistaken--

_Hard_ My belief is that Anne does not care a token for me, and likes
Kyrle better.

_Mrs. C_ [C.] You are an old friend of my son, and I may confide to you
a family secret. The extravagance of my husband left this estate deeply
involved. By this marriage with Anne Chute we redeem every acre of our
barony. My son and she have been brought up as children together, and
don’t know their true feelings yet.

_Hard_ Stop, mother, I know this: I would not wed my cousin if she did
not love me, not if she carried the whole county Kerry in her pocket,
and the barony of Kenmare in the crown of her hat.

_Mrs. C_ Do you hear the proud blood of the Cregans?

_Hard_ Woo her, Kyrle, if you like, and win her if you can. I’ll back
you.

_Enter_ ANNE CHUTE, _from house_, L.

_Anne_ [L. C.] So will I--What’s the bet?

_Mrs. C_ Hush!

_Anne_ I’d like to have bet on Kyrle.

_Hard_ Well, Anne, I’ll tell you what it was.

_Mrs. C_ [C.] Hardress!

_Anne_ [L. C.] Pull in one side aunt, and let the boy go on.

_Hard_ [R.] Kyrle wanted to know if the dark brown colt, Hardress
Cregan, was going to walk over the course for the Anne Chute Stakes, or
whether it was a scrub-race open to all.

_Anne_ I’m free-trade--coppleens, mules and biddys.

_Mrs. C_ How can you trifle with a heart like Kyrle’s?

_Anne_ Trifle! his heart can be no trifle, if he’s all in proportion.

_Enter_ SERVANT, _from house_, L.

_Servant_ Squire Corrigan, ma’am, begs to see you.

_Mrs C_ At this hour, what can the fellow want? Show Mr. Corrigan here.
[_Exit_ SERVANT _into house_, L.] I hate this man; he was my husband’s
agent, or what the people here call a middle-man--vulgarly polite,
and impudently obsequious.

_Hard_ [R.] Genus squireen--a half sir, and a whole scoundrel.

_Anne_ I know--a potatoe on a silver plate: I’ll leave you to peel him.
Come, Mr. Daly, take me for a moonlight walk, and be funny.

_Kyrle_ Funny, ma’am, I’m afraid I am--

_Anne_ You are heavy, you mean; you roll through the world like a
hogshead of whisky; but you only want tapping for pure spirits to flow
out spontaneously. Give me your arm. [_Crossing_, R.] Hold that glove
now. You are from Ballinasloe, I think?

_Kyrle_ I’m Connaught to the core of my heart.

_Anne_ To the roots of your hair, you mean. I bought a horse at
Ballinasloe fair that deceived me; I hope you won’t turn out to belong
to the same family.

_Kyrle_ [R. C.] What did he do?

_Anne_ Oh! like you, he looked well enough--deep in the chest as a
pool--a-dhiol, and broad in the back as the Gap of Dunloe--but after
two days’ warm work he came all to pieces, and Larry, my groom, said
he’d been stuck together with glue.

_Kyrle_ [R.] Really, Miss Chute! [_Music._--_Exeunt_, R. 1 E.

_Hard_ [_Advancing, laughing._] That girl is as wild as a
coppleen,--she won’t leave him a hair on the head. [_Goes up._

_Enter_ SERVANT, _showing in_ CORRIGAN, _from house_, L.

[_Exit_ SERVANT, L.

_Corrigan_ [L.] Your humble servant, Mrs. Cregan--my service t’ye,
’Squire--it’s a fine night, entirely.

_Mrs. C_ [C.] May I ask to what business, sir, we have the honor of
your call?

_Corrig_ [_Aside_, L. C.] Proud as a Lady Beelzebub, and as grand as a
queen. [_Aloud._] True for you, ma’am; I would not have, come, but for
a divil of a pinch I’m in entirely. I’ve got to pay £8,000 to-morrow or
lose the Knockmakilty farms.

_Mrs. C_ Well, sir?

_Corrig_ And I wouldn’t throuble ye--

_Mrs. C_ Trouble me, sir?

_Corrig_ Iss, ma’am--ye’d be forgettin’ now that mortgage I have on
this property. It ran out last May, and by rights--

_Mrs. C_ It will be paid next month.

_Corrig_ Are you reckonin’ on the marriage of Mister Hardress and Miss
Anne Chute?

_Hard_ [_Advancing_, R.] Mr. Corrigan, you forget yourself.

_Mrs. C_ Leave us, Hardress, a while. [HARDRESS _retires_, R.] Now, Mr.
Corrigan, state, in as few words as possible, what you demand.

_Corrig_ Mrs. Cregan, ma’am, you depend on Miss Anne Chute’s fortune to
pay me the money, but your son does not love the lady, or, if he does,
he has a mighty quare way of showing it. He has another girl on hand,
and betune the two he’ll come to the ground, and so bedad will I.

_Mrs. C_ That is false--it is a calumny, sir!

_Corrig_ I wish it was, ma’am. D’ye see that light over the lake? your
son’s eyes are fixed on it. What would Anne Chute say if she knew that
her husband, that is to be, had a mistress beyant--that he slips out
every night after you’re all in bed, and like Leandher, barrin’ the
wettin’, he sails across to his sweetheart?

_Mrs. C_ Is this the secret of his aversion to the marriage? Fool!
fool! what madness, and at such a moment.

_Corrig_ That’s what I say, and no lie in it.

_Mrs. C_ He shall give up this girl--he must!

_Corrig_ I would like to have some security for that. I want, by
to-morrow, Anne Chute’s written promise to marry him, or my £8,000.

_Mrs. C_ It is impossible, sir; you hold ruin over our heads.

_Corrig_ Madam, it’s got to hang over your head or mine.

_Mrs. C_ Stay; you know that what you ask is out of our power--you know
it--therefore this demand only covers the true object of your visit.

_Corrig_ ’Pon my honor! and you are as ’cute, ma’am, as you are
beautiful!

_Mrs. C_ Go on, sir.

_Corrig_ Mrs. Cregan, I’m goin’ to do a foolish thing--now, by gorra
I am! I’m richer than ye think, maybe, and if you’ll give me your
_personal_ security, I’ll take it.

_Mrs. C_ What do you mean?

_Corrig_ I meant that I’ll take a lien for life on _you_, instead of
the mortgage I hold on the Cregan property. [_Aside._] That’s nate, I’m
thinkin’.

_Mrs. C_ Are you mad?

_Corrig_ I am--mad in love with yourself, and that’s what I’ve been
these fifteen years. [_Music through dialogue, till_ ANNE CHUTE _is
off_.

_Mrs. C_ Insolent wretch! my son shall answer and chastise you.
[_Calls._] Hardress!

_Hard_ [_Advancing._] Madam.

_Enter_ ANNE CHUTE _and_ KYRLE, R.


_Corrig_ Miss Chute! }

_Hard_ Well, mother? } [_Together._]

_Anne_ Well, sir?    }

_Mrs. C_ [_Aside._] Scoundrel! he will tell her all and ruin us!
[_Aloud._] Nothing. [_Turns aside._

_Corrig_ Your obedient.

_Anne_ Oh! [_Crosses with_ KYRLE _and exit_, L. U. E.--_Music ceases._

_Corrig_ You are in my power, ma’am. See, now, not a sowl but myself
knows of this secret love of Hardress Cregan, and I’ll keep it as snug
as a bug in a rug, if you’ll only say the word.

_Mrs. C_ Contemptible hound, I loathe and despise you!

_Corrig_ I’ve known that fifteen years, but it hasn’t cured my heart
ache.

_Mrs. C_ And you would buy my aversion and disgust!

_Corrig_ Just as Anne Chute buys your son, if she knew but all. Can
he love his girl beyant, widout haten this heiress he’s obliged to
swallow?--ain’t you sthriven to sell him? But you didn’t feel the
hardship of being sold till you tried it on yourself.

_Mrs. C_ I beg you, sir, to leave me.

_Corrig_ That’s right, ma’am--think over it, sleep on it. To-morrow,
I’ll call for your answer. Good evenin’ kindly.

[_Music._--_Exit_ CORRIGAN, _in house_, L.

_Mrs. C_ Hardress.

_Hard_ What did he want?

_Mrs. C_ He came to tell me the meaning of yonder light upon Muckross
Head.

_Hard_ Ah! has it been discovered? Well, mother, now you know the cause
of my coldness, my indifference for Anne.

_Mrs. C_ Are you in your senses, Hardress? Who is this girl?

_Hard_ She is known at every fair and pattern in Munster as the Colleen
Bawn--her name is Eily O’Connor.

_Mrs. C_ A peasant girl--a vulgar, barefooted beggar!

_Hard_ Whatever she is, love has made her my equal, and when you set
your foot upon her you tread upon my heart.

_Mrs. C_ ’Tis well, Hardress. I feel that perhaps I have no right to
dispose of your life and your happiness--no, my dear son--I would not
wound you--heaven knows how well I love my darling boy, and you shall
feel it. Corrigan has made me an offer by which you may regain the
estate, and without selling yourself to Anne Chute.

_Hard_ What is it? Of course you accepted it?

_Mrs. C_ No, but I will accept, yes, for your sake--I--I will. He
offers to cancel this mortgage if--if--I will consent to--become his
wife.

_Hard_ You--you, mother? Has he dared--

_Mrs. C_ Hush! he is right. A sacrifice must be made--either you or I
must suffer. Life is before you--my days are well nigh past--and for
your sake, Hardress--for yours; my pride, my only one.--Oh! I would
give you more than my life.

_Hard_ Never--never! I will not--can not accept it. I’ll tear that
dog’s tongue from his throat that dared insult you with the offer.

_Mrs. C_ Foolish boy, before to-morrow night we shall be
beggars--outcasts from this estate. Humiliation and poverty stand like
specters at yonder door--to-morrow they will be realities. Can you
tear out the tongues that will wag over our fallen fortunes? You are a
child, you can not see beyond your happiness.

_Hard_ Oh, mother, mother! what can be done? My marriage with Anne is
impossible.

_Enter_ DANNY MANN, _up rock, at back._

_Danny_ [R. C.] Whisht, if ye plaze--ye’re talkin’ so loud she’ll hear
ye say that--she’s comin’.

_Mrs. C_ Has this fellow overheard us?

_Hard_ If he has, he is mine, body and soul. I’d rather trust him with
a secret than keep it myself.

_Mrs. C_ [L. C.] I can not remain to see Anne; excuse me to my friends.
The night perhaps will bring counsel, or at least resolution to hear
the worst! Good night, my son.

[_Music._--_Exit into house_, L.

_Danny_ [R. C.] Oh, masther! she doesn’t know the worst! She doesn’t
know that you are married to the Colleen Bawn.

_Hard_ Hush! what fiend prompts you to thrust that act of folly in my
face?

_Danny_ Thrue for ye, masther! I’m a dirty mane scut to remind ye of it.

_Hard_ What will my haughty, noble mother say, when she learns the
truth! how can I ask her to receive Eily as a daughter?--Eily, with
her awkward manners, her Kerry brogue, her ignorance of the usages of
society. Oh, what have I done?

_Danny_ Oh! vo--vo, has the ould family come to this! Is it the
daughter of Mihil-na-Thradrucha, the old rope-maker of Garryowen, that
’ud take the flure as your wife?

_Hard_ Be silent, scoundrel! How dare you speak thus of my
love!--wretch that I am to blame her!--poor, beautiful, angel-hearted
Eily.

_Danny_ Beautiful is it! Och--wurra--wurra, deelish! The looking-glass
was never made that could do her justice; and if St. Patrick wanted a
wife, where would he find an angel that ’ud compare with the Colleen
Bawn. As I row her on the lake, the little fishes come up to look at
her; and the wind from heaven lifts up her hair to see what the divil
brings her down here at all--at all.

_Hard_ The fault is mine--mine alone--I alone will suffer!

_Danny_ Why isn’t it mine? Why can’t I suffer for yez, masther dear?
Wouldn’t I swally every tear in your body, every bit of bad luck in
your life, and then wid a stone round my neck, sink myself and your
sorrows in the bottom of the lower lake.

_Hard_ [_Placing hand on_ DANNY.] Good Danny, away with you to the
boat--be ready in a few moments; we will cross to Muckross Head.
[_Looks at light at back._

[_Music._--_Exit_ HARDNESS _into house_, L.

_Danny_ Never fear, sir. Oh! it isn’t that spalpeen, Corrigan, that
shall bring ruin on that ould place. Lave Danny alone. Danny, the fox,
will lade yez round and about, and cross the scint. [_Takes off his
hat--sees letter._] Bedad, here’s the letter from the Colleen Bawn
that I couldn’t find a while ago--it’s little use now. [_Goes to lower
window, and reads by light from house._] “Come to your own Eily, that
has not seen you for two long days. Come, acushla agrah machree. I have
forgotten how much you love me--Shule, shule agrah.--Colleen Bawn.”
Divil an address is on it.

_Enter_ KYRLE _and_ ANNE, L. U. E.

_Anne_ [C.] Have they gone?

_Kyrle_ [L. C.] It is nearly midnight.

_Anne_ Before we go in, I insist on knowing who is this girl that
possesses your heart. You confess that you are in love--deeply in love.

_Kyrle_ I do confess it--but not even your power can extract that
secret from me--do not ask me, for I could not be false, yet dare not
be true. [_Exit_ KYRLE _into house_, L.

_Anne_ [L. C.] He loves me--oh! he loves me--the little bird is making
a nest in my heart. Oh! I’m faint with joy.

_Danny_ [_As if calling after him._] Sir, sir!

_Anne_ Who is that?

_Danny_ I’m the boatman below, an’ I’m waitin for the gintleman.

_Anne_ What gentleman?

_Danny_ Him that’s jist left me, ma’am--I’m waitin’ on him.

_Anne_ Does Mr. Kyrle Daly go out boating at this hour?

_Danny_ It’s not for me to say, ma’am, but every night at twelve
o’clock I’m here wid my boat under the blue rock below, to put him
across the lake to Muckross Head. I beg your pardon, ma’am, but here’s
a paper ye dropped on the walk beyant--if it’s no vally I’d like to
light my pipe wid it. [_Gives it._

_Anne_ A paper I dropped! [_Goes to window--reads._

_Danny_ [_Aside._] Oh, Misther Corrigan, you’ll ruin masther will ye?
aisy now, and see how I’ll put the cross on ye.

_Anne_ A love-letter from some peasant girl to Kyrle Daly! Can this be
the love of which he spoke? have I deceived myself?

_Danny_ I must be off, ma’am; here comes the signal. [_Music._

_Anne_ The signal?

_Danny_ D’ye see yonder light upon Muckross Head? It is in a cottage
windy; that light goes in and out three times winkin’ that way, as
much as to say, “Are ye comin’?” Then if the light in that room there
[_points at house above_,] answers by a wink, it manes No! but if it
goes out entirely, his honor jumps from the parlor windy into the
garden behind, and we’re off. Look! [_Light in cottage disappears._]
That’s one. [_Light appears._] Now again. [_Light disappears._] That’s
two. [_Light appears._] What did I tell you? [_Light disappears._]
That’s three, and here it comes again. [_Light appears._] Wait now, and
ye’ll see the answer. [_Light disappears from window_, L.] That’s my
gentleman. [_Music change._] You see he’s goin’--good night, ma’am.

_Anne_ Stay, here’s money; do not tell Mr. Daly that I know of this.

_Danny_ Divil a word--long life t’ye. [_Goes up._

_Anne_ I was not deceived; he meant me to understand that he loved me!
Hark! I hear the sound of some one who leaped heavily on the garden
walk. [_Goes to house_ L.--_looking at back_.

_Enter_ HARDRESS, _wrapped in a boat cloak_, L. U. E.

_Danny_ [_Going down_, R. C.] All right, yer honor.

[HARDRESS _crosses at back, and down rock_, R. C.

_Anne_ [_Hiding_, L.] It is he, ’tis he.

[_Mistaking_ HARDRESS _for_ DALY--_closed in_.


SCENE II.--_The Gap of Dunloe._ [_1st grooves._] _Hour before sunrise._

_Enter_ CORRIGAN, R. 1 E.

_Corrig_ From the rock above I saw the boat leave Torc Cregan. It is
now crossing the lake to the cottage. Who is this girl? What is this
mysterious misthress of young Cregan?--that I’ll find out.

[MYLES _sings outside_, L.

  “Oh! Charley Mount is a pretty place,
  In the month of July----”

_Corrig_ Who’s that?--’Tis that poaching scoundrel--that horse stealer,
Myles na Coppaleen. Here he comes with a keg of illicit whisky, as
bould as Nebuckadezzar.

_Enter_ MYLES, _singing, with keg on his shoulder_, L.

Is that you, Myles?

_Myles_ No! it’s my brother.

_Corrig_ I know ye, my man.

_Myles_ Then why the divil did ye ax?

_Corrig_ You may as well answer me kindly--civility costs nothing.

_Myles_ [L. C.] Ow now! don’t it? Civility to a lawyer manes
six-and-eight-pence about.

_Corrig_ [R. C.] What’s that on your shoulder?

_Myles_ What’s that to you?

_Corrig_ I am a magistrate, and can oblige you to answer.

_Myles_ Well! it’s a boulster, belongin’ to my mother’s feather bed.

_Corrig_ Stuff’d with whisky!

_Myles_ Bedad! how would I know what it’s stuff’d wid? I’m not an
upholsterer.

_Corrig_ Come, Myles, I’m not so bad a fellow as ye may think.

_Myles_ To think of that now!

_Corrig_ I am not the mane creature you imagine!

_Myles_ Ain’t ye now, sir? You keep up appearances mighty well, indeed.

_Corrig_ No, Myles! I am not that blackguard I’ve been represented.

_Myles_ [_Sits on keg._] See that now--how people take away a man’s
character. You are another sort of blackguard entirely.

_Corrig_ You shall find me a gentleman--liberal, ready to protect you.

_Myles_ Long life t’ye sir.

_Corrig_ Myles, you have come down in the world lately; a year ago you
were a thriving horse-dealer, now you are a lazy, ragged fellow.

_Myles_ Ah, it’s the bad luck, sir, that’s in it.

_Corrig_ No, it’s the love of Eily O’Connor that’s in it--it’s the
pride of Garryowen that took your heart away, and made ye what ye
are--a smuggler and a poacher.

_Myles_ Thim’s hard words.

_Corrig_ But they are true. You live like a wild beast in some cave or
hole in the rocks above; by night your gun is heard shootin’ the otter
as they lie out on the stones, or you snare the salmon in your nets; on
a cloudy night your whisky-still is going--you see, I know your life.

_Myles_ Better than the priest, and devil a lie in it.

_Corrig_ Now, if I put ye in a snug farm--stock ye with pigs and
cattle, and rowl you up comfortable--d’ye think the Colleen Bawn
wouldn’t jump at ye?

_Myles_ Bedad, she’d make a lape, I b’lieve--and what would I do for
all this luck?

_Corrig_ Find out for me who it is that lives at the cottage on
Muckross Head.

_Myles_ That’s aisy--it’s Danny Mann--no less and his ould mother
Sheelah.

_Corrig_ Yes, Myles, but there’s another--a girl who is hid there.

_Myles_ Ah, now!

_Corrig_ She only goes out at night.

_Myles_ Like the owls.

_Corrig_ She’s the misthress of Hardress Cregan.

_Myles_ [_Seizing_ CORRIGAN.] Thurra mon dhiol, what’s that?

_Corrig_ Oh, lor! Myles--Myles--what’s the matter--are you mad?

_Myles_ No--that is--why--why did ye raise your hand at me in that way?

_Corrig_ I didn’t.

_Myles_ I thought ye did--I’m mighty quick at takin’ thim hints, bein’
on me keepin’ agin the gaugers--go on--I didn’t hurt ye.

_Corrig_ Not much.

_Myles_ You want to find out who this girl is?

_Corrig_ I’ll give £20 for the information--there’s ten on account.

[_Gives money._

_Myles_ Long life t’ye; that’s the first money I iver got from a
lawyer, and bad luck to me, but there’s a cure for the evil eye in thim
pieces.

_Corrig_ You will watch to-night?

_Myles_ In five minutes I’ll be inside the cottage itself.

_Corrig_ That’s the lad.

_Myles_ [_Aside._] I was goin’ there.

_Corrig_ And to-morrow you will step down to my office with the
particulars?

_Myles_ To-morrow you shall breakfast on them.

_Corrig_ Good night, entirely. [_Exit_ CORRIGAN, L.

_Myles_ I’ll give ye a cowstail to swally, and make ye think it’s a
chapter in St. Patrick, ye spalpeen? When he called Eily the misthress
of Hardress Cregan, I nearly sthretched him--begorra, I was full of
sudden death that minute! Oh, Eily! acushla agrah asthore machree! as
the stars watch over Innisfallen, and as the wathers go round it and
keep it, so I watch and keep round you, avourneen!

_Song._--MYLES.

  Oh, Limerick is beautiful, as everybody knows,
  The river Shannon’s full of fish, beside that city flows;
  But it is not the river, nor the fish that preys upon my mind,
  Nor with the town of Limerick have I any fault to find.
  The girl I love is beautiful, she’s fairer than the dawn;
  She lives in Garryowen, and she’s called the Colleen Bawn.
  As the river, proud and bold, goes by that famed city,
  So proud and cold, without a word, that Colleen goes by me!
                                          Oh, hone! Oh, hone!

  Oh, if I was the Emperor of Russia to command,
  Or, Julius Cæsar, or the Lord Lieutenant of the land,
  I’d give up all my wealth, my manes, I’d give up my army,
  Both the horse, the fut, and the Royal Artillery;
  I’d give the crown from off my head, the people on their knees,
  I’d give my fleet of sailing ships upon the briny seas,
  And a beggar I’d go to sleep, a happy man at dawn,
  If by my side, fast for my bride, I’d the darlin’ Colleen Bawn.
                                          Oh, hone! Oh, hone!

I must reach the cottage before the masther arrives; Father Tom is
there waitin’ for this keg o’ starlight--it’s my tithe; I call every
tenth keg “his riverince.” It’s worth money to see the way it does the
old man good, and brings the wather in his eyes, the only place I ever
see any about him--heaven bless him!

[_Sings._ _Exit_ MYLES, R.--_Music._


  SCENE III.--_Interior of Eily’s Cottage on Muckross Head; fire
  burning_, R. 3 E.; _table_, R. C.; _arm chair; two stools_, R. _of
  table; stool_ L. _of table; basin, sugar spoon, two jugs, tobacco,
  plate, knife, and lemon on table_.

FATHER TOM _discovered smoking in arm chair_, R. C.--EILY _in balcony,
watching over lake_.

_Father Tom_ [_Sings._] “Tobacco is an Injun weed.” And every weed
want’s wathering to make it come up; but tobacco bein’ an’ Injun weed
that is accustomed to a hot climate, water is entirely too cold for its
warrum nature--it’s whisky and water it wants. I wonder if Myles has
come; I’ll ask Eily. [_Calls._] Eily, alanna! Eily, a suilish machree!

_Eily_ [_Turning._] Is it me, Father Tom?

_Father T_ Has he come?

_Eily_ No; his boat is half a mile off yet.

_Father T_ Half a mile! I’ll choke before he’s here.

_Eily_ Do you mean Hardress?

_Father T_ No, dear! Myles na Coppaleen--cum spiritu Hiberneuse--which
manes in Irish, wid a keg of poteen.

_Enter_ MYLES, R. U. E., _down_ C.

_Myles_ Here I am, your riverince, never fear. I tould Sheelah to hurry
up with the materials, knowin’ ye be dhry and hasty.

_Enter_ SHEELAH, _with kettle of water_, R. U. E.

_Sheelah_ Here’s the hot water.

_Myles_ Lave it there till I brew Father Tom a pint of mother’s milk.

_Sheelah_ Well thin, ye’ll do your share of the work, an not a ha’porth
more.

_Myles_ Didn’t I bring the sperrits from two miles and more? and I
deserve to have pref’rence to make the punch for his riverince.

_Sheelah_ And didn’t I watch the kettle all night, not to let it off
the boil?--there now.

_Myles_ [_Quarreling with_ SHEELAH.] No, you didn’t, etc.

_Sheelah_ [_Quarreling._] Yes, I did, etc.

_Eily_ No, no; I’ll make it, and nobody else.

_Father T_ Aisy now, ye becauns, and whist; Myles shall put in the
whisky, Sheelah shall put in the hot water, and Eily, my Colleen,
shall put the sugar in the cruiskeen. A blessin’ on ye all three that
loves the ould man. [MYLES _takes off hat_--WOMEN _curtsey--they make
punch_.] See now, my children, there’s a moral in everthing, e’en in a
jug of punch. There’s the sperrit, which is the sowl and strength of
the man. [MYLES _pours spirit from keg_.] That’s the whisky. There’s
the sugar, which is the smile of woman; [EILY _puts sugar_.] without
that life is without taste or sweetness. Then there’s the lemon, [EILY
_puts lemon_.] which is love; a squeeze now and again does a boy no
harm; but not too much. And the hot water [SHEELAH _pours water_.]
which is adversity--as little as possible if ye plaze--that makes the
good things better still.

_Myles_ And it’s complate, ye see, for it’s a woman that gets into hot
wather all the while. [_Pours from jug to jug._

_Sheelah_ Myles, if I hadn’t the kettle, I’d bate ye.

_Myles_ Then, why didn’t ye let me make the punch? There’s a guinea for
your riverince that’s come t’ye--one in ten I got a while ago--it’s
your tithe--put a hole in it, and hang it on your watch chain, for it’s
a mighty great charm entirely.

[_They sit_, SHEELAH _near fire_, COLLEEN _on stool beside her_, FATHER
TOM _in chair_, MYLES _on stool_, L. _of table_.

_Father T_ Eily, look at that boy, and tell me, haven’t ye a dale to
answer for?

_Eily_ He isn’t as bad about me as he used to be; he’s getting over it.

_Myles_ Yes, darlin’, the storm has passed over, and I’ve got into
settled bad weather.

_Father T_ Maybe, afther all, ye’d have done better to have married
Myles there, than be the wife of a man that’s ashamed to own ye.

_Eily_ He isn’t--he’s proud of me. It’s only when I spake like the poor
people, and say or do anything wrong, that he’s hurt; but I’m gettin’
clane of the brogue, and learnin’ to do nothing--I’m to be changed
entirely.

_Myles_ Oh! if he’d lave me yer own self, and only take away wid him
his improvements. Oh! murder--Eily, aroon, why wasn’t ye twins, an’ I
could have one of ye, only nature couldn’t make two like ye--it would
be onreasonable to ax it.

_Eily_ Poor Myles, do you love me still so much?

_Myles_ Didn’t I lave the world to folley ye, and since then there’s
been neither night nor day in my life--I lay down on Glenna Point
above, where I see this cottage, and I lived on the sight of it. Oh!
Eily, if tears were pison to the grass there wouldn’t be a green blade
on Glenna Hill this day.

_Eily_ But you knew I was married, Myles.

_Myles_ Not thin, aroon--Father Tom found me that way, and sat beside,
and lifted up my soul. Then I confessed to him, and, sez he, “Myles,
go to Eily, she has something to say to you--say I sent you.” I came,
and ye tould me ye were Hardress Cregan’s wife, and that was a great
comfort entirely. Since I knew that [_Drinks--voice in cup._] I haven’t
been the blackguard I was.

_Father T_ See the beauty of the priest, my darlin’--_videte et
admirate_--see and admire it. It was at confession that Eily tould me
she loved Cregan, and what did I do?--sez I, “Where did you meet your
sweetheart?” “At Garryowen,” sez she. “Well,” says I; “that’s not the
place.” “Thrue, your riverince, it’s too public entirely,” sez she.
“Ye’ll mate him only in one place,” sez I; “and that’s the stile that’s
behind my chapel,” for, d’ye see, her mother’s grave was forenint the
spot, and there’s a sperrit round the place, [MYLES _drinks_,] that
kept her pure and strong. Myles, ye thafe, drink fair.

_Sheelah_ Come now, Eily, couldn’t ye cheer up his riverince wid the
tail of a song?

_Eily_ Hardress bid me not sing any ould Irish songs, he says the words
are vulgar.

_Sheelah_ Father Tom will give ye absolution.

_Father T_ Put your lips to that jug; there’s only the strippens left.
Drink! and while that thrue Irish liquor warms your heart, take this
wid it. May the brogue of ould Ireland niver forsake your tongue--may
her music niver lave yer voice--and may a true Irishwoman’s virtue
niver die in your heart!

_Myles_ Come, Eily, it’s my liquor--haven’t ye a word to say for it?

_Song_, EILY--“_Cruiskeen Lawn_.”

  Let the farmer praise his grounds,
  As the huntsman doth his hounds,
    And the shepherd his fresh and dewy morn;
  But I, more blest than they,
  Spend each night and happy day.
    With my smilin’ little Crusikeen Lawn, Lawn, Lawn.
  _Chorus_ [_Repeat._] Gramachree, mavourneen, slanta gal avourneen,
  Gramachree ma Cruiskeen Lawn, Lawn, Lawn,
  With my smiling little Cruiskeen Lawn.

[_Chorused by_ MYLES, FATHER T., _and_ SHEELAH.

MYLES.

  And when grim Death appears,
  In long and happy years,
  To tell me that my glass is run,
  I’ll say, begone you slave,
  For great Bacchus gave me lave
  To have another Cruiskeen Lawn--Lawn--Lawn.

_Chorus.--Repeat._

  Gramachree, &c., &c.

_Hard_ [_Without_, L. U. E.] Ho! Sheelah--Sheelah!

_Sheelah_ [_Rising._] Whist! it’s the master.

_Eily_ [_Frightened._] Hardress! oh, my! what will he say if he finds
us here--run, Myles--quick, Sheelah--clear away the things.

_Father T_ Hurry now, or we’ll get Eily in throuble.

[_Takes keg_--MYLES _takes jugs_--SHEELAH _kettle_.

_Hard_ Sheelah, I say!

[_Exeunt_ FATHER TOM _and_ MYLES, R. U. E., _quickly_.

_Sheelah_ Comin’, Sir, I’m puttin’ on my petticoat.

[_Exit_ SHEELAH, R. U. E., _quickly_.

_Enter_ HARDRESS _and_ DANNY, L. U. E. _opening_--DANNY _immediately
goes off_, R. U. E.

_Eily_ [C.] Oh, Hardress, asthore?

_Hard_ [L. C.] Don’t call me by those confounded Irish words--what’s
the matter? you’re trembling like a bird caught in a trap.

_Eily_ Am I, mavou--no I mean--is it tremblin’ I am, dear?

_Hard_ What a dreadful smell of tobacco there is here, and the fumes of
whisky punch, too; the place smells like a shebeen. Who has been here?

_Eily_ There was Father Tom, an’ Myles dhropped in.

_Hard_ Nice company for my wife--a vagabond.

_Eily_ Ah! who made him so but me, dear? Before I saw you, Hardress,
Myles coorted me, and I was kindly to the boy.

_Hard_ Damn it, Eily, why will you remind me that my wife was ever in
such a position?

_Eily_ I won’t see him again--if yer angry, dear, I’ll tell him to go
away, and he will, because the poor boy loves me.

_Hard_ Yes, better than I do you mean?

_Eily_ No, I don’t--oh! why do you spake so to your poor Eily!

_Hard_ Spake so! Can’t you say speak?

_Eily_ I’ll thry, aroon--I’m sthrivin’--’tis mighty hard, but what
wouldn’t I undert-tee-ta--undergo for your sa-se--for your seek.

_Hard_ Sake--sake!

_Eily_ Sake--seek--oh, it is to bother people entirely they mixed ’em
up! Why didn’t they make them all one way?

_Hard_ [_Aside._] It is impossible! How can I present her as my wife?
Oh! what an act of madness to tie myself to one so much beneath
me--beautiful--good as she is--

_Eily_ Hardress, you are pale--what has happened?

_Hard_ Nothing--that is, nothing but what you will rejoice at.

_Eily_ What d’ye mane?

_Hard_ What do I mane! Mean--mean!

_Eily_ I beg your pardon, dear.

_Hard_ Well; I mean that after to-morrow there will be no necessity
to hide our marriage, for I shall be a beggar, my mother will be an
outcast, and amidst all the shame, who will care what wife a Cregan
takes?

_Eily_ And d’ye think I’d like to see you dhragged down to my side--ye
don’t know me--see now--never call me wife again--don’t let on to
mortal that we’re married--I’ll go as a servant in your mother’s
house--I’ll work for the smile ye’ll give me in passing, and I’ll be
happy, if ye’ll only let me stand outside and hear your voice.

_Hard_ You’re a fool. I told you that I was bethrothed to the richest
heiress in Kerry; her fortune alone can save us from ruin. To-night my
mother discovered my visits here, and I told her who you were.

_Eily_ Oh! what did she say?

_Hard_ It broke her heart.

_Eily_ Hardress! is there no hope?

_Hard_ None. That is none--that--that I can name.

_Eily_ There is one--I see it.

_Hard_ There is. We were children when we were married, and I could
get no priest to join our hands but one, and he had been disgraced by
his bishop. He is dead. There was no witness to the ceremony but Danny
Mann--no proof but his word, and your certificate.

_Eily_ [_Takes paper from her breast._] This!

_Hard_ Eily! if you doubt my eternal love, keep that security; it
gives you the right to the shelter of my roof; but oh! if you would be
content with the shelter of my heart.

_Eily_ And will it save ye, Hardress? And will your mother forgive me?

_Hard_ She will bless you--she will take you to her breast.

_Eily_ But you--another will take you to her breast.

_Hard_ Oh, Eily, darling, d’ye think I could forget you,
machree--forget the sacrifice more than blood you give me?

_Eily_ Oh! when you talk that way to me, ye might take my life, and
heart, and all. Oh! Hardress, I love you--take the paper and tare it.
[HARDRESS _takes paper_.

_Enter_ MYLES C., _opening_.

_Myles_ No. I’ll be damned if he shall.

_Hard_ Scoundrel! you have been listening?

_Myles_ To every word. I saw Danny, wid his ear agin that dure, so as
there was only one kay-hole, I adopted the windy. Eily, aroon, Mr.
Cregan will giv’ ye back that paper; you can’t tare up an oath; will ye
help him then to cheat this other girl, and to make her his mistress,
for that’s what she’ll be if ye are his wife. An’ after all, what is
there agin’ the crature? Only the money she’s got. Will you stop lovin’
him when his love belongs to another? No! I know it by myself; but if
ye jine their hands together your love will be an adultry.

_Eily_ Oh, no!

_Hard_ Vagabond! outcast! jail bird! dare you prate of honor to me?

_Myles_ [C.] I am an outlaw, Mr. Cregan--a felon, may be--but if you do
this thing to that poor girl that loves you so much--had I my neck in
the rope--or my fut on the deck of a convict ship--I’d turn round and
say to ye, “Hardress Cregan, I make ye a present of the contimpt of a
rogue.” [_Snaps fingers._

_Music till end Act.--Enter_ FATHER TOM, SHEELAH _and_ DANNY, R. U.
E.--HARDRESS _throws down paper--goes to table--takes hat_.

_Hard_ Be it so, Eily, farewell! until my house is clear of these
vermin--[DANNY _appears at back_]--you will see me no more.

[_Exit_ HARDRESS, L. C., _followed by_ DANNY.

_Eily_ Hardress--Hardress! [_Going up._] Don’t leave me, Hardress!

_Father T_ [_Intercepts her._] Stop, Eily! [DANNY _returns and listens_.

_Eily_ He’s gone--he’s gone!

_Father T_ Give me that paper, Myles. [MYLES _picks it up--gives it_.]
Kneel down there, Eily, before me--put that paper in your breast.

_Eily_ [_Kneeling._] Oh, what will I do--what will I do?

_Father T_ Put your hand upon it now.

_Eily_ Oh, my heart--my heart!

_Father T_ Be thee hush, and spake after me--by my mother that’s in
heaven.

_Eily_ By my mother that’s in heaven.

_Father T_ By the light and the word.

_Eily_ By the light and the word.

_Father T_ Sleepin’ or wakin’.

_Eily_ Sleepin’ or wakin’.

_Father T_ This proof of my truth.

_Eily_ This proof of my truth.

_Father T_ Shall never again quit my breast.

_Eily_ Shall never again quit my breast.

EILY _utters a cry and falls--Tableau_.




ACT II.


SCENE I.--[_1st Grooves._]--_Gap of Dunloe; same as 2d Scene, Act
I.--Music._

_Enter_ HARDRESS _and_ DANNY, L. 1 E.

_Hard_ [R.] Oh, what a giddy fool I’ve been! What would I give to
recall this fatal act which bars my fortune?

_Danny_ [L.] There’s something throublin’ yez, Masther Hardress. Can’t
Danny do something to aise ye? Spake the word, and I’ll die for ye.

_Hard_ Danny, I _am_ troubled. I was a fool when I refused to listen to
you at the chapel of Castle Island.

_Danny_ When I warned ye to have no call to Eily O’Connor?

_Hard_ I was mad to marry her.

_Danny_ I knew she was no wife for you. A poor thing widout any
manners, or money, or book larnin’, or a ha’porth o’ fortin’. Oh,
worra! I told ye that, but ye bate me off, and here now is the way of
it.

_Hard_ Well, it’s done, and can’t be undone.

_Danny_ Bedad, I dun know that. Wouldn’t she untie the knot
herself--couldn’t ye coax her?

_Hard_ No.

_Danny_ Is that her love for you? You that give up the divil an’
all for her. What’s _her_ ruin to yours? Ruin--goredoutha--ruin is
it? Don’t I pluck a shamrock and wear it a day for the glory of St.
Patrick, and then throw it away when it’s gone by my likin’s. What is
_she_ to be ruined by a gentleman? Whoo! Mighty good for the likes o’
her.

_Hard_ She would have yielded, but--

_Danny_ Asy now, an’ I’ll tell ye. Pay her passage out to Quaybeck and
put her aboord a three-master, widout sayin’ a word. Lave it to me.
Danny will clear the road foreninst ye.

_Hard_ Fool, if she still possesses that certificate--the proof of my
first marriage--how can I dare to wed another? Commit bigamy--disgrace
my wife--bastardize my children?

_Danny_ Den by the powers, I’d do by Eily as wid the glove there on yer
hand; make it come off as it came on--an’ if it fits too tight, take
the knife to it.

_Hard_ [_Turning to him._] What do you mean?

_Danny_ Only gi’ me the word, an’ I’ll engage that the Colleen Bawn
will never trouble ye any more; don’t ax me any questions at all.
Only--if you’re agreeable, take off that glove from yer hand an’ give
it to me for a token--that’s enough.

_Hard_ [_Throws off cloak; seizes him; throws him down._] Villain! Dare
you utter a word or meditate a thought of violence towards that girl--

_Danny_ Oh, murder! may I never die in sin, if--

_Hard_ Begone! away, at once, and quit my sight. I have chosen my doom!
I must learn to endure it--but blood!--and hers! Shall I make cold and
still that heart that beats alone for me?--quench those eyes that look
so tenderly in mine? Monster! am I so vile that you dare to whisper
such a thought?

_Danny_ Oh, masther! divil burn me if I meant any harm.

_Hard_ Mark me well, now. Respect my wife as you would the queen of the
land--whisper a word such as those you uttered to me, and it will be
your last. I warn ye--remember and obey.

[_Exit_ HARDRESS, R.

_Danny_ [_Rises--picks up cloak._] Oh, the darlin’ crature! would I
harrum a hair of her blessed head?--no! Not unless you gave me that
glove, and den I’d jump into the bottomless pit for ye.

[_Exit_ DANNY, R. _Music--change._


SCENE II.--_Room in_ MRS. CREGAN’S _house; window_, R., _in flat,
backed by landscape; door_, L., _in flat; backed by interior. Lights
up._

_Enter_ ANNE CHUTE, L. _in flat_.

_Anne_ That fellow runs in my head. [_Looking at window._] There he is
in the garden, smoking like a chimney-pot. [_Calls._] Mr. Daly!

_Kyrle_ [_Outside window._] Good morning!

_Anne_ [_Aside._] To think he’d smile that way, after going Leandering
all night like a dissipated young owl. [_Aloud._] Did you sleep well?
[_Aside._] Not a wink, you villain, and you know it.

_Kyrle_ I slept like a top.

_Anne_ [_Aside._] I’d like to have the whipping of ye. [_Aloud._] When
did you get back?

_Kyrle_ Get back! I’ve not been out.

_Anne_ [_Aside._] He’s not been out! This is what men come to after a
cruise at sea--they get sunburnt with love. Those foreign donnas teach
them to make fire-places of their hearts, and chimney-pots of their
mouths. [_Aloud._] What are you doing down there? [_Aside._] As if he
was stretched out to dry. [KYRLE _puts down pipe outside_.

_Enter_ KYRLE _through window_, R., _in flat_.

_Kyrle_ [R. C.] I have been watching Hardress coming over from Divil’s
Island in his boat--the wind was dead against him.

_Anne_ [L. C.] It was fair for going to Divil’s Island last night, I
believe.

_Kyrle_ Was it?

_Anne_ You were up late, I think?

_Kyrle_ I was. I watched by my window for hours, thinking of her I
loved--slumber overtook me, and I dreamed of a happiness I never can
hope for.

_Anne_ Look me straight in the face.

_Kyrle_ Oh! if some fairy could strike us into stone now--and leave us
looking forever into each other’s faces, like the blue lake below and
the sky above it!

_Anne_ Kyrle Daly! What would you say to a man who had two loves, one
to whom he escaped at night, and the other to whom he devoted himself
during the day--what would you say?

_Kyrle_ I’d say he had no chance.

_Anne_ Oh, Captain Cautious! Well answered. Isn’t he fit to take care
of anybody! his cradle was cut out of a witness-box.

_Enter_ HARDRESS _through window_, R., _in flat_.

_Kyrle_ [R.] Anne! I don’t know what you mean, but that I know
that I love you, and you are sporting with a wretchedness you can
not console. I was wrong to remain here so long, but I thought my
friendship for Hardress would protect me against your invasion--now I
will go. [HARDRESS _advancing_.

_Hard_ [C.] No, Kyrle, you will stay. Anne, he loves you, and I more
than suspect you prefer him to me. From this moment you are free; I
release you from all troth to me: in his presence I do this.

_Anne_ [L.] Hardress!

_Hard_ There is a bar between us which you should have known before,
but I could not bring myself to confess. Forgive me, Anne--you deserve
a better man than I am. [_Exit_, L.

_Anne_ A bar between us! What does he mean?

_Kyrle_ He means that he is on the verge of ruin: he did not know how
bad things were till last night. His generous noble heart recoils from
receiving anything from you but love.

_Anne_ And does he think I’d let him be ruined any way? Does he think I
wouldn’t sell the last rood of land--the gown off my back, and the hair
off my head, before that boy that protected and loved me, the child,
years ago, should come to a hap’orth of harrum?

[_Crosses to_ R.

_Kyrle_ Miss Chute!

_Anne_ Well, I can’t help it. When I am angry the brogue comes out,
and my Irish heart will burst through manners, and graces, and twenty
stay-laces. [_Crosses to_ L.] I’ll give up my fortune--that I will!

_Kyrle_ You can’t--you’ve got a guardian who can not consent to such a
sacrifice.

_Anne_ Have I? then I’ll find a husband that will.

_Kyrle_ [_Aside._] She means me--I see it in her eyes.

_Anne_ [_Aside._] He’s trying to look unconscious. [_Aloud._] Kyrle
Daly, on your honor and word as a gentleman, do you love me and nobody
else?

_Kyrle_ Do you think me capable of contaminating your image by
admitting a meaner passion into my breast?

_Anne_ Yes, I do.

_Kyrle_ Then you wrong me.

_Anne_ I’ll prove that in one word. Take care, now; it’s coming.

_Kyrle_ Go on.

_Anne_ [_Aside._] Now I’ll astonish him. [_Aloud._] Eily!

_Kyrle_ What’s that?

_Anne_ “Shule, shule, agrah!”

_Kyrle_ Where to?

_Anne_ Three winks, as much as to say, “Are you coming?” and an
extinguisher above here means “Yes.” Now you see I know all about it.

_Kyrle_ You have the advantage of me.

_Anne_ Confess now, and I’ll forgive you.

_Kyrle_ I will; tell me what to confess, and I’ll confess it--I don’t
care what it is.

_Anne_ [_Aside._] If I hadn’t eye proof he’d brazen it out of me. Isn’t
he cunning? He’s one of those that would get fat where a fox would
starve.

_Kyrle_ That was a little excursion into my past life--a sudden descent
on my antecedents, to see if you could not surprise an infidelity--but
I defy you.

_Anne_ You do? I accept that defiance; and, mind me, Kyrle, if I find
you true as I once thought, there’s my hand; but if you are false in
this, Anne Chute will never change her name for yours. [_He kisses her
hand._] Leave me now.

_Kyrle_ Oh, the lightness you have given to my heart! The number of
pipes I’ll smoke this afternoon will make them think we’ve got a
haystack on fire. [_Exit_ KYRLE, _through window_, R.

_Anne_ [_Rings bell on table_, R.] Here, Pat, Barney, some one.

_Enter_ SERVANT, L. _door in flat_.

Tell Larry Dolan, my groom, to saddle the black mare, Fireball, but not
bring her round the house--I’ll mount in the stables.

[_Exit_ SERVANT, L. _door in flat_.

I’ll ride over to Muckross Head, and draw that cottage; I’ll know
what’s there. It mayn’t be right, but I haven’t a big brother to see
after me--and self-protection is the first law of nature.

[_Exit_ ANNE, R. 1 E.

_Music. Enter_ MRS. CREGAN _and_ HARDRESS, L. _door in flat_.

_Mrs. C_ [R. C.] What do you say, Hardress?

_Hard_ [L. C.] I say, mother, that my heart and faith are both already
pledged to another, and I can not break my engagement.

_Mrs. C_ And this is the end of all our pride!

_Hard_ Repining is useless--thought and contrivance are of no
avail--the die is cast.

_Mrs. C_ Hardress, I speak not for myself, but for you--and I would
rather see you in your coffin than married to this poor, lowborn,
silly, vulgar creature. I know you, my son; you will be miserable when
the infatuation of first love is past; when you turn from her and face
the world, as one day you must do, you will blush to say, “This is my
wife.” Every word from her mouth will be a pang to your pride. You will
follow her movements with terror--the contempt and derision she excites
will rouse you first to remorse, and then to hatred--and from the bed
to which you go with a blessing, you will rise with a curse.

_Hard_ Mother! mother! [_Throws himself in chair._

_Mrs. C_ To Anne you have acted a heartless and dishonorable part--her
name is already coupled with yours at every fireside in Kerry.

_Enter_ SERVANT, L. _door in flat_.

_Serv_ Mr. Corrigan, ma’am.

_Mrs. C_ He comes for his answer. Show him in.

[_Exit_ SERVANT, L. _door in flat_.

The hour has come, Hardress--what answer shall I give him?

_Hard_ Refuse him--let him do his worst.

_Mrs. C_ And face beggary! On what shall we live? I tell you the
prison for debt is open before us. Can you work? No! Will you enlist
as a soldier, and send your wife into service? We are ruined--d’ye
hear?--ruined! I must accept this man only to give you and yours a
shelter, and under Corrigan’s roof I may not be ashamed, perhaps, to
receive your wife.

_Enter_ SERVANT, _showing in_ MR. CORRIGAN, L. _door in flat_.

_Corrig_ [L.] Good morning, ma’am; I am punctual, you perceive.

_Mrs. C_ [C.] We have considered your offer, sir, and we see no
alternative--but--but--

_Corrig_ Mrs. Cregan, I’m proud, ma’am, to take your hand.

_Hard_ [_Starting up._] Begone--begone, I say; touch her, and I’ll
brain you!

_Corrig_ Squire! Sir! Mr. Hardress!

_Hard_ Must I hurl you from the house?

_Enter two_ SERVANTS, _door in flat_.

_Mrs. C_ Hardress, my darling boy, restrain yourself.

_Corrig_ Good morning, ma’am. I have my answer. [_To_ SERVANT.] Is Miss
Chute within?

_Serv_ No, sir; she’s just galloped out of the stable yard.

_Corrig_ Say I called to see her. I will wait upon her at this hour
to-morrow. [_Looking at the Cregans._] To-morrow! to-morrow!

[_Exit, followed by_ SERVANTS, L. _door in flat_.

_Mrs. C_ To-morrow will see us in Limerick Jail, and this house in the
hands of the sheriff.

_Hard_ Mother, heaven guide and defend me! let me rest for a while--you
don’t know all yet, and I have not the heart to tell you.

[_Crosses_ L.

_Mrs. C_ With you, Hardress, I can bear anything--anything--but your
humiliation and your unhappiness--

_Hard_ I know it, mother, I know it. [_Exit_, L. 1 E. _Music._

DANNY _appears at window_, R., _in flat_.

_Danny_ Whisht--missiz--whisht.

_Mrs. C_ [L. C.] Who’s there?

_Danny_ It’s me, sure, Danny--that is--I know the throuble that’s in
it. I’ve been through it all wid him.

_Mrs. C_ You know, then?

_Danny_ Everything, ma’am; and, sure, I shtruv hard and long to impache
him from doing it.

_Mrs. C_ Is he, indeed, so involved with this girl that he will not
give her up?

_Danny_ No; he’s got over the worst of it, but she holds him tight, and
he feels kindly and soft-hearted for her, and daren’t do what another
would.

_Mrs. C_ Dare not?

_Danny_ Sure she might be packed off across the wather to Ameriky,
or them parts beyant? Who’d ever ax a word afther her?--barrin’ the
masther, who’d murdher me if he knew I whispered such a thing.

_Mrs. C_ But would she go?

_Danny_ Ow, ma’am, wid a taste of persuasion, we’d mulvather her
aboord. But there’s another way again, and if ye’d only coax the
masther to send me his glove, he’d know the manin’ of that token, and
so would I.

_Mrs. C_ His glove?

_Danny_ Sorra a ha’porth else. If he’ll do that, I’ll take my oath
ye’ll hear no more of the Colleen Bawn.

_Mrs. C_ I’ll see my son. [_Exit_ L. D. F.

_Danny_ Tare an’ ’ouns, that lively girl, Miss Chute, has gone the
road to Muckross Head; I’ve watched her--I’ve got my eye on all of
them. If she sees Eily--ow, ow, she’ll get the ring itself in that
helpin’ maybe, of kale-canon. By the piper, I’ll run across the lake,
and get there first; she’s got a long round to go, and the wind
rising--a purty blast entirely.

[_Goes to window--Music._

_Re-enter_ MRS. CREGAN, L. D. F., _with glove_.

_Mrs. C_ [_Aside._] I found his gloves in the hall, where he had thrown
them in his hat.

_Danny_ Did ye ax him, ma’am?

_Mrs. C_ I did--and here is the reply. [_Holds out glove._

_Danny_ He has changed his mind, then?

_Mrs. C_ He has entirely.

_Danny_ And--and--I am--to--do it?

_Mrs. C_ That is the token.

_Danny_ I know it--I’ll keep my promise. I’m to make away with her?

_Mrs. C_ Yes, yes--take her away--away with her!

[_Exit_ MRS. CREGAN, L. _door in flat_.

_Danny_ Never fear, ma’am. [_Going to window._] He shall never see or
hear again of the Colleen Bawn.

[_Exit_ DANNY _through window--change_.


SCENE III.--_Exterior of_ EILY’S _Cottage; Cottage_, R. 3 E.; _set
pieces, backed by Lake; table and two seats_, R. C.

SHEELAH _and_ EILY _discovered, knitting_.

_Sheelah_ [R.] Don’t cry, darlin’--don’t, alanna!

_Eily_ [L.] He’ll never come back to me--I’ll never see him again,
Sheelah!

_Sheelah_ Is it lave his own wife?

_Eily_ I’ve sent him a letther by Myles, and Myles has never come
back--I’ve got no answer--he won’t spake to me--I am standin’ betune
him and fortune--I’m in the way of his happiness. I wish I was dead!

_Sheelah_ Whisht! be thee husht! what talk is that? when I’m tuk sad
that way, I go down to the chapel and pray a turn--it lifts the cloud
off my heart.

_Eily_ I can’t pray; I’ve tried, but unless I pray for him, I can’t
bring my mind to it.

_Sheelah_ I never saw a colleen that loved as you love; sorra come to
me, but I b’lieve you’ve got enough to supply all Munster, and more
left over than would choke ye if you wern’t azed of it.

_Eily_ He’ll come back--I’m sure he will; I was wicked to doubt. Oh!
Sheelah! what becomes of the girls he doesn’t love? Is there anything
goin’ on in the world where he isn’t?

_Sheelah_ There now--you’re smilin’ again.

_Eily_ I’m like the first mornin’ when he met me--there was dew on the
young day’s eye--a smile on the lips o’ the lake. Hardress will come
back--oh! yes; he’ll never leave his poor Eily all alone by herself in
this place. Whisht, now, an’ I’ll tell you. [_Music._

_Song.--Air, “Pretty Girl Milking her Cow.”_

  ’Twas on a bright morning in summer,
    I first heard his voice speaking low,
  As he said to a colleen beside me,
    “Who’s that pretty girl milking her cow?”
  And many times after he met me,
    And vowed that I always should be
  His own little darling alanna,
    Mavourneen a sweelish machree.

  I haven’t the manners or graces
    Of the girls in the world where ye move,
  I haven’t their beautiful faces,
    But I have a heart that can love.
  If it plase ye, I’ll dress in satins,
    And jewels I’ll put on my brow,
  But don’t ye be after forgettin’
    Your pretty girl milking her cow.

_Sheelah_ Ah, the birds sit still on the boughs to listen to her, and
the trees stop whisperin’; she leaves a mighty big silence behind her
voice, that nothin’ in nature wants to break. My blessin’ on the path
before her--there’s an angel at the other end of it.

[_Exit_ SHEELAH _in cottage_, R.

_Eily_ [_Repeats last line of song._]

_Enter_ ANNE CHUTE, L. U. E.

_Anne_ There she is.

_Eily_ [_Sings till facing Anne--stops--they examine each other._]

_Anne_ My name is Anne Chute.

_Eily_ I am Eily O’Connor.

_Anne_ You are the Colleen Bawn--the pretty girl.

_Eily_ And you are the Colleen Ruaidh.

_Anne_ [_Aside._] She is beautiful.

_Eily_ [_Aside._] How lovely she is.

_Anne_ We are rivals.

_Eily_ I am sorry for it.

_Anne_ So am I, for I feel that I could have loved you.

_Eily_ That’s always the way of it; everybody wants to love me, but
there’s something spoils them off.

_Anne_ [_Showing letter._] Do you know that writing?

_Eily_ I do, ma’am, well, though I don’t know how you came by it.

_Anne_ I saw your signals last night--I saw his departure, and I have
come here to convince myself of his falsehood to me. But now that I
have seen you, you have no longer a rival in his love, for I despise
him with all my heart, who could bring one so beautiful and simple as
you are to ruin and shame!

_Eily_ He didn’t--no--I am his wife! Oh, what have I said!

_Anne_ What?

_Eily_ Oh, I didn’t mane to confess it--no, I didn’t! but you wrung it
from me in defense of him.

_Anne_ You his wife?

_Enter_ DANNY, L. U. E.

_Danny_ [_At back--aside._] The divil! they’re at it--an’ I’m too late!

_Anne_ I can not believe this--show me your certificate.

_Eily_ Here it is.

_Danny_ [_Advances between them._] Didn’t you swear to the priest that
it should niver lave your breast?

_Anne_ Oh! you’re the boatman.

_Danny_ Iss, ma’am!

_Anne_ Eily, forgive me for doubting your goodness, and your purity. I
believe you. Let me take your hand. [_Crosses to her._] While the heart
of Anne Chute beats, you have a friend that won’t be spoiled off, but
you have no longer a rival, mind that. All I ask of you is that you
will never mention this visit to Mr. Daly--and for you [_To_ DANNY.]
this will purchase your silence. [_Gives money._] Good-by!

[_Exit_ ANNE, L. U. E.

_Danny_ Long life t’ye. [_Aside._] What does it mane? Hasn’t she found
me out?

_Eily_ Why did she ask me never to spake to Mr. Daly of her visit here?
Sure I don’t know any Mr. Daly.

_Danny_ Didn’t she spake of him before, dear?

_Eily_ Never!

_Danny_ Nor didn’t she name Master Hardress?

_Eily_ Well, I don’t know; she spoke of him and of the letter I wrote
to him, but I b’lieve she never named him intirely.

_Danny_ [_Aside._] The divil’s in it for sport; she’s got ’em mixed yet.

_Enter_ SHEELAH _from cottage_, R.

_Sheelah_ What brings you back, Danny?

_Danny_ Nothing! but a word I have from the masther for the Colleen here.

_Eily_ Is it the answer to the letter I sent by Myles?

_Danny_ That’s it, jewel, he sent me wid a message.

_Sheelah_ [C.] Somethin’ bad has happened. Danny, you are as pale as
milk, and your eye is full of blood--yez been drinkin’.

_Danny_ May be I have.

_Sheelah_ You thrimble, and can’t spake straight to me. Oh! Danny, what
is it, avick?

_Danny_ Go on now, an’ stop yer keenin’.

_Eily_ Faith, it isn’t yourself that’s in it, Danny; sure there’s
nothing happened to Hardress?

_Danny_ Divil a word, good or bad, I’ll say while the mother’s there.

_Sheelah_ I’m goin’. [_Aside._] What’s come to Danny this day, at all,
at all; bedad, I don’t know my own flesh and blood.

[_Runs into cottage._

_Danny_ Sorro’ and ruin has come on the Cregans; they’re broke intirely.

_Eily_ Oh, Danny.

_Danny_ Whisht, now! You are to meet Masther Hardress this evenin’, at
a place on the Divil’s Island, beyant. Ye’ll niver breathe a word to a
mortal where yer goin’, d’ye mind, now; but slip down, unbeknown, to
the landin’ below, where I’ll have the boat waitin’ for yez.

_Eily_ At what hour?

_Danny_ Just after dark; there’s no moon to-night, an’ no one will see
us crossin’ the water. [_Music till end of scene._

_Eily_ I will be there; I’ll go down only to the little chapel by the
shore, and pray there ’till ye come. [_Exit_ EILY, _into cottage_, R.

_Danny_ I’m wake and cowld! What’s this come over me? Mother, mother,
acushla.

_Enter_ SHEELAH, R.

_Sheelah_ What is it, Danny?

_Danny_ [_Staggering to table._] Give me a glass of spirits!

[_Falls in chair--Change quickly._


SCENE IV.--_The old Weir Bridge, or a Wood on the verge of the
Lake_--[_1st grooves._]

_Enter_ ANNE CHUTE, R.

_Anne_ Married! the wretch is married! and with that crime already on
his conscience he was ready for another and similar piece of villainy.
It’s the Navy that does it. It’s my belief those sailors have a wife in
every place they stop at.

_Myles_ [_Sings outside_, R.]

  “Oh! Eily astoir, my love is all crost,
  Like a bud in the frost.”

_Anne_ Here’s a gentleman who has got my complaint--his love is all
crost, like a bud in the frost.

_Enter_ MYLES, R.

  _Myles_ “And there’s no use at all in my goin’ to bed,
  For it’s drames, and not sleep, that comes into my head,
    And it’s all about you,” etc., etc.

_Anne_ My good friend, since you can’t catch your love, d’ye think you
could catch my horse? [_Distant thunder._

_Myles_ Is it a black mare wid a white stockin on the fore off leg?

_Anne_ I dismounted to unhook a gate--a peal of thunder frightened her,
and she broke away.

_Myles_ She’s at Torc Cregan stables by this time--it was an admiration
to watch her stride across the Phil Dolan’s bit of plough.

_Anne_ And how am I to get home?

_Myles_ If I had four legs, I wouldn’t ax betther than to carry ye, and
a proud baste I’d be. [_Thunder--rain._

_Anne_ The storm is coming down to the mountain--is there no shelter
near?

_Myles_ There may be a corner in this ould chapel. [_Rain._] Here comes
the rain--murdher! ye’ll be wet through.
[_Music--pulls off coat._] Put this round yez.

_Anne_ What will you do? You’ll catch your death of cold.

_Myles_ [_Taking out bottle._] Cowld is it? Here’s a wardrobe of top
coats. [_Thunder._] Whoo! this is a fine time for the water--this way,
ma’am.

[_Exeunt_ MYLES _and_ ANNE, L.

_Enter_ EILY, _cloak and hood_, R.

_Eily_ Here’s the place where Danny was to meet me with the boat. Oh!
here he is.

_Enter_ DANNY, L.

How pale you are!

_Danny_ The thunder makes me sick.

_Eily_ Shall we not wait till the storm is over?

_Danny_ If it comes on bad we can put into the Divil’s Island Cave.

_Eily_ I feel so happy that I am going to see him, yet there is a
weight about my heart that I can’t account for.

_Danny_ I can. [_Aside._] Are you ready now?

_Eily_ Yes; come--come.

_Danny_ [_Staggering._] I’m wake yet. My throat is dry--if I’d a
draught of whisky now.

_Eily_ Sheelah gave you a bottle.

_Danny_ I forgot--it’s in the boat. [_Rain._

_Eily_ Here comes the rain--we shall get wet.

_Danny_ There’s the masther’s boat cloak below.

_Eily_ Come, Danny, lean on me. I’m afraid you are not sober enough to
sail the skiff.

_Danny_ Sober! The dhrunker I am, the better I can do the work I’ve got
to do.

_Eily_ Come, Danny, come--come.

[_Exeunt_ EILY _and_ DANNY, R.--_Music ceases._

_Re-enter_ ANNE CHUTE _and_ MYLES, L.

_Myles_ It was only a shower, I b’lieve--are ye wet, ma’am?

_Anne_ Dry as a biscuit.

_Myles_ Ah! then it’s yerself is the brave and beautiful lady--as bould
an’ proud as a ship before the blast. [ANNE _looks off_, R.

_Anne_ Why, there is my mare, and who comes with--[_Crosses to_ R.

_Myles_ It’s Mr. Hardress Cregan himself.

_Anne_ Hardress here?

_Myles_ Eily gave me a letter for him this morning.

_Enter_ HARDRESS, R.

_Hard_ Anne, what has happened? Your horse galloped wildly into the
stable--we thought you had been thrown.

_Myles_ Here is a lether Eily tould me to give him. [_To_ HARDRESS.] I
beg your pardon, sir, but here’s the taste of a lether I was axed to
give your honor. [_Gives letter._

_Hard_ [_Aside._] From Eily!

_Anne_ Thanks, my good fellow, for your assistance.

_Myles_ Not at all, ma’am. Sure, there isn’t a boy in the County
Kerry that would not give two thumbs off his hands to do a service to
the Colleen Ruaidh, as you are called among us--iss indeed, ma’am.
[_Going--aside._] Ah! then it’s the purty girl she is, in them long
clothes. [_Exit_ MYLES, R.

_Hard_ [_Reads, aside._] “I am the cause of your ruin; I can’t live
with that thought killin’ me. If I do not see you before night you will
never again be throubled with your poor Eily.” Little simpleton! she is
capable of doing herself an injury.

_Anne_ Hardress! I have been very blind and very foolish, but today I
have learned to know my own heart. There’s my hand; I wish to seal my
fate at once. I know the delicacy which prompted you to release me
from my engagement to you. I don’t accept that release; I am yours.

_Hard_ Anne, you don’t know all.

_Anne_ I know more than I wanted, that’s enough. I forbid you ever to
speak on this subject.

_Hard_ You don’t know my past life.

_Anne_ And I don’t want to know. I’ve had enough of looking into past
lives; don’t tell me anything you wish to forget.

_Hard_ Oh, Anne--my dear cousin; if I could forget--if silence could be
oblivion. [_Exeunt_ HARDRESS _and_ ANNE, L.


SCENE V.--_Exterior of Myles’ Hut._ [_1st grooves._]

_Enter_ MYLES, R., _singing “Brian O’Linn.”_

  “Brian O’Linn had no breeches to wear,
  So he bought him a sheepskin to make him a pair;
  The skinny side out, the woolly side in,
  ‘They are cool and convanient,’ said Brian O’Linn.”

[_Locks door of cabin._] Now I’ll go down to my whisky-still. It is
under my feet this minute, bein’ in a hole in the rocks they call
O’Donoghue’s stables, a sort of water cave; the people around here
think that the cave is haunted with bad spirits, and they say that of
a dark stormy night strange unearthly noises is heard comin’ out of
it--it is me singing, “The night before Larry was stretched.” Now I’ll
go down to that cave, and wid a sod of live turf under a kettle of
worty, I’ll invoke them sperrits--and what’s more, they’ll come.

[_Exit_ MYLES, _singing_, R. _Music till_ MYLES _begins to speak next
scene_.


  SCENE VI.--_A Cave; through large opening at back is seen the Lake
  and the Moon; rocks_ R. _and_ L.--_flat rock_, R. C.; _gauge waters
  all over stage; rope hanging from_ C., _hitched on wing_, R. U. E.

_Enter_ MYLES, _singing, top of rock_, R. U. E.

_Myles_ And this is a purty night for my work! The smoke of my
whisky-still will not be seen; there’s my distillery beyant in a snug
hole up there, [_Unfastens rope_, L.] and here’s my bridge to cross
over to it. I think it would puzzle a gauger to folly me; this is
a patent of my own--a tight-rope bridge. [_Swings across from_ R.
_to_ L.] Now I tie up my drawbridge at this side till I want to go
back--what’s that--it was an otter I woke from a nap he was takin’ on
that bit of rock there--ow! ye divil! if I had my gun I’d give ye a
leaden supper. I’ll go up and load it, may be I’ll get a shot; them
stones is the place where they lie out of a night, and many a one I’ve
shot of them.

[_Music.--Disappears up rock_, L. U. E.

_Eily_ What place is this you have brought me to?

_Danny_ Never fear--I know where I’m goin’--step out on that rock--mind
yer footin’; ’tis wet there.

_Eily_ I don’t like this place--it’s like a tomb.

_Danny_ Step out, I say; the boat is laking.

[EILY _steps on to rock_, R. C.

_Eily_ Why do you spake to me so rough and cruel?

_Danny_ Eily, I have a word to say t’ye; listen now, and don’t trimble
that way.

_Eily_ I won’t, Danny--I won’t.

_Danny_ Wonst, Eily, I was a fine brave boy, the pride of my ould
mother, her white haired-darlin’--you wouldn’t think it to look at me
now. D’ye know how I got changed to this?

_Eily_ Yes, Hardress told me.

_Danny_ He done it--but I loved him before it, an’ I loved him after
it--not a dhrop of blood I have, but I’d pour out like wather for the
masther.

_Eily_ I know what you mean--as he has deformed your body--ruined your
life--made ye what ye are.

_Danny_ Have you, a woman, less love for him than I, that you wouldn’t
give him what he wants of you, even if he broke your heart as he broke
my back, both in a moment of passion? Did I ax him to ruin himself
and his ould family, and all to mend my bones? No! I loved him, and I
forgave him that.

_Eily_ Danny, what do you want me to do?

[DANNY _steps out on to rock_.

_Danny_ Give me that paper in your breast?

[_Boat floats off slowly_, R.

_Eily_ I can’t--I’ve sworn never to part with it! You know I have!

_Danny_ Eily, that paper stands between Hardress Cregan and his
fortune; that paper is the ruin of him. Give it, I tell yez.

_Eily_ Take me to the priest; let him lift the oath off me. Oh, Danny,
I swore a blessed oath on my two knees, and would ye ax me to break
that?

_Danny_ [_Seizes her hands._] Give it up, and don’t make me hurt ye.

_Eily_ I swore by my mother’s grave, Danny. Oh! Danny dear, don’t.
Don’t, acushla, and I’ll do anything. See now, what good would it be?
sure, while I live I’m his wife. [_Music changes._

_Danny_ Then you’ve lived too long. Take your marriage lines wid ye to
the bottom of the lake.

[_He throws her from rock backwards into the water_, L. C., _with a
cry; she reappears, clinging to rock_.

_Eily_ No! save me! Don’t kill me! Don’t, Danny, I’ll do anything--only
let me live.

_Danny_ He wants ye dead. [_Pushes her off._

_Eily_ Oh, heaven! help me! Danny--Dan-- [_Sinks._

_Danny_ [_Looking down._] I’ve done it--she’s gone.

[_Shot is fired_, L. U. E.; _he falls--rolls from the rock into the
water_, R. C.

MYLES _appears with gun, on rock_, L. U. E.

_Myles_ I hit one of them bastes that time. I could see well, though
it was so dark. But there was somethin’ moving on that stone. [_Swings
across to_ R. U. E.] Divil a sign of him. Stop! [_Looks down._] What’s
this? It’s a woman--there’s something white there. [_Figure rises near
rock_, R. U. E.; _kneels down; tries to take the hand of figure_.] Ah!
that dress!--it’s Eily. My own darlin’ Eily.

[_Pulls off waistcoat--jumps off rock._ EILY _rises_, R.; _then_ MYLES
_and_ EILY _rise up_, C.; _he turns, and seizes rock_, R. C.; EILY
_across left arm_.




ACT III.


SCENE I.--_Interior of an Irish hut; door and small opening_, R. C.
_Door_ L. C. _in flat_.

  _Truckle bed and bedding_, R. C., _on which_ DANNY MANN _is
  discovered; table with jug of water; lighted candle stuck in bottle_,
  L.; _two stools_--SHEELAH _at table_, L. _Music._

_Danny_ [_In his sleep._] Gi’ me the paper, thin--screeching won’t save
ye--down--down! [_Wakes._] Oh, mother! darlin’ mother!

_Sheelah_ [_Waking._] Eh! did ye call me, Danny?

_Danny_ Gi’ me a dhrop of wather--it’s the thirst that’s a killin’ me.

_Sheelah_ [_Takes jug._] The fever’s on ye mighty bad.

_Danny_ [_Drinks, falls back, groans._] Oh, the fire in me won’t go
out! How long have I been here?

_Sheelah_ Ten days this night.

_Danny_ Ten days dis night! Have I been all that time out of my mind?

_Sheelah_ Iss, Danny. Ten days ago, that stormy night, ye crawled in at
that dure, wake an’ like a ghost.

_Danny_ I remind me now.

_Sheelah_ Ye tould me that ye’d been poachin’ salmon, and had been shot
by the keepers.

_Danny_ Who said I hadn’t?

_Sheelah_ Divil a one! Why did ye make me promise not to say a word
about it? Didn’t ye refuse even to see a doctor itself?

_Danny_ Has any one axed after me?

_Sheelah_ No one but Mr. Hardress.

_Danny_ Heaven bless him!

_Sheelah_ I told him I hadn’t seen ye, and here ye are this day
groanin’ when there’s great doin’s up at Castle Chute. To-morrow the
masther will be married to Miss Anne.

_Danny_ Married! but--the--his--

_Sheelah_ Poor Eily, ye mane?

_Danny_ Hide the candle from my eyes--it’s painin’ me; shade it off. Go
on, mother.

_Sheelah_ The poor Colleen! Oh, no, Danny, I knew she’d die of the love
that was chokin’ her. He didn’t know how tindher she was when he gave
her the hard word. What was that message the masther sent to her, that
he wouldn’t let me hear? It was cruel, Danny, for it broke her heart
entirely; she went away that night, and, two days after, a cloak was
found floatin’ in the reeds, under Brikeen Bridge; nobody knew it but
me. I turned away, and never said--. The creature is drowned, Danny,
and woe to them as dhruv her to it. She has no father, no mother to put
a curse on him, but the Father above that niver spakes till the last
day, and then--[_She turns and sees_ DANNY _gasping, his eyes fixed on
her, supporting himself on his arm_.] Danny! Danny! he’s dyin’--he’s
dyin’!

[_Runs to him_, R. _of bed_.

_Danny_ Who said that? Ye lie! I never killed her--sure he sent me the
glove--where is it?

_Sheelah_ He’s ravin’ again.

_Danny_ The glove--he sent it to me full of blood. Oh, master, dear,
there’s your token. I told ye I would clear the path foreninst ye.

_Sheelah_ Danny, what d’ye mane?

_Danny_ I’ll tell ye how I did it, masther; ’twas dis way--but don’t
smile like dat--don’t, sir! She wouldn’t give me de marriage lines,
so I sunk her and her proofs wid her. She’s gone! she came up wonst,
but I put her down agin. Never fear--she’ll never throuble yer
again--never--never!

[_Lies down; mutters._ SHEELAH _on her knees, in horror and prayer_.

_Sheelah_ ’Twas he! he!--my own son--he’s murdered her, and he’s dyin’
now--dyin’, wid blood on his hands! Danny! Danny! spake to me!

_Danny_ A docther! will they let me die like a baste, and never a
docther?

_Sheelah_ I’ll run for one that’ll cure ye. Oh, weerasthrue, Danny!
Is it for this I’ve loved ye? No, forgive, acushla, it isn’t your own
mother that ’ud add to yer heart-breakin’ and pain. I’ll fetch the
docther, avick. [_Music--puts on cloak, and pulls hood over her head._]
Oh, hone! oh hone!

[_Exit_ SHEELAH, L. _door in flat--a pause--knock--pause--knock_.

_Enter_ CORRIGAN, _door in flat_, L. C.

_Corrig_ Sheelah! Sheelah! Nobody here? I’m bothered entirely. The
cottage on Muckross Head is empty--not a sowl in it but a cat. Myles
has disappeared, and Danny gone--vanished, bedad, like a fog--Sheelah
is the only one remaining. I called to see Miss Chute; I was kicked
out. I sent her a letter; it was returned to me, unopened. Her lawyer
has paid off the mortgage, and taxed my bill of costs--the spalpeen!
[DANNY _groans_.] What’s that? Some one is asleep there. ’Tis Danny!

_Danny_ A docther!--gi’ me a docther!

_Corrig_ Danny here--concealed, too! Oh, there’s something going on
that’s worth peepin’ into. Whist! there’s footsteps comin’. If I
could hide a bit. I’m a magistrate, an’ I ought to know what’s goin’
on--here’s a turf-hole, wid a windy in it.

[_Exit_ CORRIGAN, _opening in flat_, R. C.

_Enter_ SHEELAH _and_ FATHER TOM, L. C. _door_.

_Sheelah_ [_Goes to_ DANNY.] Danny!

_Danny_ Is that you, mother?

_Sheelah_ I’ve brought the docther, asthore. [DANNY _looks up_.

_Danny_ The priest!

_Sheelah_ [_On her knees_, R. _of bed_.] Oh, my darlin’! don’t be angry
wid me, but dis is the docther you want; it isn’t in your body where
the hurt is; the wound is in your poor sowl--there’s all the harrum.

_Father T_ Danny, my son--[_Sits_ L. _of bed_.]--it’s sore-hearted I am
to see you down this way.

_Sheelah_ And so good a son he was to his ould mother.

_Danny_ Don’t say that--don’t! [_Covering his face._

_Sheelah_ I will say it--my blessin’ on ye--see that, now, he’s cryin’.

_Father T_ Danny, the hand of death is on ye. Will ye lave your sins
behind ye here below, or will ye take them with ye above, to show them
on ye? Is there anything ye can do that’ll mend a wrong? leave that
legacy to your friend, and he’ll do it. Do ye want pardon of any
one down here? tell me, avick; I’ll get it for ye and send it after
you--may be ye’ll want it.

_Danny_ [_Rising up an arm._] I killed Eily O’Connor.

_Sheelah_ [_Covers her face with her hands._] Oh! oh!

_Father T_ What harrum had ye agin the poor Colleen Bawn?

[CORRIGAN _takes notes_.

_Danny_ She stud in _his_ way, and he had my heart and sowl in his
keeping.

_Father T_ Hardress?

_Danny_ Hisself! I said I’d do it for him, if he’d give me the token.

_Father T_ Did Hardress employ you to kill the girl?

_Danny_ He sent me the glove; that was to be the token that I was to
put her away, and I did--I--in the Pool a Dhiol. She would not gi’ me
the marriage lines; I threw her in and then I was kilt.

_Father T_ Killed! by whose hand?

_Danny_ I don’t know, unless it was the hand of heaven.

_Father T_ [_Rising, goes down--aside._] Myles na Coppaleen is at the
bottom of this; his whisky-still is in that cave, and he has not been
seen for ten days past. [_Aloud--goes to_ DANNY.] Danny, after ye fell,
how did ye get home?

_Danny_ I fell in the wather; the current carried me to a rock; how
long I was there half drowned I don’t know, but on wakin’ I found my
boat floatin’ close by, an’ it was still dark; I got in and crawled
here.

_Father T_ [_Aside._] I’ll go and see Myles--there’s more in this than
has come out.

_Sheelah_ Won’t yer riverince say a word of comfort to the poor boy?
He’s in great pain entirely.

_Father T_ Keep him quiet, Sheelah. [_Music._] I’ll be back again with
the comfort for him. Danny, your time is short; make the most of it.
[_Aside._] I’m off to Myles na Coppaleen. Oh, Hardress Cregan--[_Going
up._]--ye little think what a bridal day ye’ll have!

[_Exit door in flat_, L. C.

_Corrig_ [_Who has been writing in note-book, comes out at back._] I’ve
got down every word of the confession. Now, Hardress Cregan, there will
be guests at your weddin’ to-night ye little dhrame of.

[_Exit_ L. _door in flat_, L. C.

_Danny_ [_Rising up._] Mother, mother! the pain is on me.
Wather--quick--wather!

[SHEELAH _runs to_ L. _table; takes jug; gives it to_ DANNY; _he
drinks_; SHEELAH _takes jug_; DANNY _struggles--falls back on bed;
close on picture_.


SCENE II.--_Chamber in Castle Chute._ [_1st Grooves._]

_Enter_ KYRLE DALY _and_ SERVANT, R.

_Kyrle_ Inform Mrs. Cregan that I am waiting upon her.

_Enter_ MRS. CREGAN, L.

_Mrs. C_ I am glad to see you, Kyrle. [_Exit_ SERVANT, L.

_Kyrle_ [R. C.] You sent for me, Mrs. Cregan. My ship sails from
Liverpool to-morrow. I never thought I could be so anxious to quit my
native land.

_Mrs. C_ I want you to see Hardress. For ten days past he shuns the
society of his bride. By night he creeps out alone in his boat on the
lake--by day he wanders round the neighborhood, pale as death. He is
heart-broken.

_Kyrle_ Has ye asked to see me?

_Mrs. C_ Yesterday he asked where you were.

_Kyrle_ Did he forget that I left your house when Miss Chute, without
a word of explanation, behaved so unkindly to me?

_Mrs. C_ She is not the same girl since she accepted Hardress. She
quarrels--weeps--complains, and has lost her spirits.

_Kyrle_ She feels the neglect of Hardress.

_Anne_ [_Without_, R.] Don’t answer me! Obey, and hold your tongue!

_Mrs. C_ Do you hear? she is rating one of the servants.

_Anne_ [_Without._] No words--I’ll have no sulky looks, neither.

_Enter_ ANNE, R., _dressed as a bride, with a vail and wreath in her
hand_.

_Anne_ Is that the vail and wreath I ordered? How dare you tell me
that? [_Throws it off_, R.

_Mrs. C_ Anne! [ANNE _sees_ KYRLE--_stands confused_.

_Kyrle_ You are surprised to see me in your house, Miss Chute?

_Anne_ You are welcome, sir.

_Kyrle_ [_Aside._] She looks pale! She’s not happy--that’s gratifying.

_Anne_ [_Aside._] He doesn’t look well--that’s some comfort.

_Mrs. C_ I’ll try to find Hardress. [_Exit_ MRS. CREGAN, L.

_Kyrle_ I hope you don’t think I intrude--that is--I came to see Mrs.
Cregan.

_Anne_ [_Sharply._] I don’t flatter myself you wished to see me; why
should you?

_Kyrle_ Anne, I am sorry I offended you; I don’t know what I did, but
no matter.

_Anne_ Not the slightest.

_Kyrle_ I released your neighborhood of my presence.

_Anne_ Yes, and you released the neighborhood of the presence of
somebody else--she and you disappeared together.

_Kyrle_ She!

_Anne_ Never mind.

_Kyrle_ But I do mind. I love Hardress Cregan as a brother, and I hope
the time may come, Anne, when I can love you as a sister.

_Anne_ Do you? I don’t.

_Kyrle_ I don’t want the dislike of my friend’s wife to part my friend
and me.

_Anne_ Why should it? I’m nobody.

_Kyrle_ If you were my wife, and asked me to hate any one, I’d do it--I
couldn’t help it.

_Anne_ I believed words like that once when you spoke them, but I have
been taught how basely you can deceive.

_Kyrle_ Who taught you?

_Anne_ Who?--your wife.

_Kyrle_ My what?

_Anne_ Your wife--the girl you concealed in the cottage on Muckross
Head. Stop, now--don’t speak--save a falsehood, however many ye may
have to spare. I saw the girl--she confessed.

_Kyrle_ Confessed that she was my wife?

_Anne_ Made a clean breast of it in a minute, which is more than you
could do with a sixteen-foot wagon and a team of ten, in a week.

_Kyrle_ Anne, hear me; this is a frightful error--the girl will not
repeat it.

_Anne_ Bring her before me and let her speak.

_Kyrle_ How do I know where she is?

_Anne_ Well, bring your boatman then, who told me the same.

_Kyrle_ I tell you it is false; I never saw--never knew the girl.

_Anne_ You did not? [_Shows_ EILY’S _letter_.] Do you know that? You
dropped it, and I found it.

_Kyrle_ [_Takes letter._] This! [_Reads._

_Enter_ HARDRESS, L.

_Anne_ Hardress! [_Turns aside._

_Kyrle_ Oh! [_Suddenly struck with the truth; glances towards_ ANNE;
_finding her looking away, places letter to_ HARDRESS.] Do you know
that?--you dropped it.

_Hard_ [_Conceals letter._] Eh? Oh!

_Kyrle_ ’Twas he. [_Looks from one to the other._] She thinks me
guilty; but if I stir to exculpate myself, he is in for it.

_Hard_ You look distressed, Kyrle. Anne, what is the matter?

_Kyrle_ Nothing, Hardress. I was about to ask Miss Chute to forget a
subject which was painful to her, and to beg of her never to mention it
again--not even to you, Hardress.

_Hard_ I am sure she will deny you nothing.

_Anne_ I will forget, sir. [_Aside._] But I will never forgive
him--never.

_Kyrle_ [_Aside._] She loves me still, and he loves another, and I
am the most miserable dog that ever was kicked. [_Crosses to_ L.]
Hardress, a word with you. [_Exeunt_ KYRLE _and_ HARDRESS, L.

_Anne_ And this is my wedding day. There goes the only man I ever
loved. When he’s here near by me, I could give him the worst treatment
a man could desire, and when he goes away he takes the heart and all
of me off with him, and I feel like an unfurnished house. This is
pretty feelings for a girl to have, and she in her regimentals. Oh! if
he wasn’t married--but he is, and he’d have married me as well--the
malignant! Oh! if he had, how I’d have made him swing for it--it would
have afforded me the happiest moment of my life. [_Exit_ ANNE, L.
_Music._


SCENE III.--_Exterior of Myles’s Hut, door_ R. _in flat_. [_2nd
grooves._]

_Enter_ FATHER TOM, L.

_Father T_ Here’s Myle’s shanty. I’m nearly killed with climbin’
the hill. I wonder is he at home? Yes, the door is locked inside.
[_Knocks._] Myles--Myles, are ye at home?

_Myles_ [_Outside_, R. 2 E.] No--I’m out.

_Enter_ MYLES, R. 2 E.

Arrah! is it yourself, Father Tom, that’s in it?

_Father T_ Let us go inside, Myles--I’ve a word to say t’ye.

_Myles_ I--I’ve lost the key.

_Father T_ Sure it’s stickin’ inside.

_Myles_ I always lock the dure inside and lave it there when I go out,
for fear on losin’ it.

_Father T_ Myles, come here to me. It’s lyin’ ye are. Look me in the
face. What’s come to ye these tin days past--three times I’ve been to
your door and it was locked, but I heard ye stirrin’ inside.

_Myles_ It was the pig, yer riverince.

_Father T_ Myles, why did yer shoot Danny Mann?

_Myles_ Oh, murther, who tould you that?

_Father T_ Himself.

_Myles_ Oh, Father Tom! have ye’ seen him?

_Father T_ I’ve just left him.

_Myles_ Is it down there ye’ve been?

_Father T_ Down where?

_Myles_ Below, where he’s gone to--where would he be, afther murthering
a poor crature?

_Father T_ How d’ye know that?

_Myles_ How! how did I!--whist, Father Tom, it was his ghost.

_Father T_ He is not dead, but dyin’ fast, from the wound ye gave him.

_Myles_ I never knew ’twas himself ’till I was tould.

_Father T_ Who tould you?

_Myles_ Is it who?

_Father T_ Who? who?--not Danny, for he doesn’t know who killed him.

_Myles_ Wait, an’ I’ll tell you. It was nigh twelve that night, I was
comin’ home--I know the time, betoken Murty Dwyer made me step in his
shebeen, bein’ the wake of the ould Callaghan, his wife’s uncle--and a
dacent man he was. “Murty,” sez I--

_Father T_ Myles, you’re desavin’ me.

_Myles_ Is it afther desavin’ yer riverence I’d be?

_Father T_ I see the lie in yer mouth. Who tould ye it was Danny Mann
ye killed?

_Myles_ You said so a while ago.

_Father T_ Who tould ye it was Danny Mann?

_Myles_ I’m comin’ to it. While I was at Murty’s, yer riverince, as I
was a-tellin’ you--Dan Dayley was there--he had just kim’d in. “Good
morrow,--good day”--ses he. “Good morrow, good Dan, ses I,”--jest that
ways entirely--“it’s an opening to the heart to see you.” Well, yer
riverence, as I ware sayin’,--“long life an’ good wife to ye, Masther
Dan,” ses I. “Thank ye, ses he, and the likes to ye, anyway.” The
moment I speck them words, Dan got heart, an’ up an’ tould Murty about
his love for Murty’s darter--the Colleen Rue. The moment he heard that,
he puts elbows in himself, an’ stood lookin’ at him out on the flure.
“You flog Europe, for boldness,” ses he--“get out of my sight,” ses
he,--“this moment,” ses he,--“or I’ll give yer a kick that will rise
you from poverty to the highest pitch of affluence,” ses he--“away out
’o that, you notorious delinquent; single your freedom, and double your
distance,” ses he. Well, Dan was forced to cut an’ run. Poor boy! I
was sorry for his trouble; there isn’t a better son nor brother this
moment goin’ the road than what he is--said--said--there was’nt better,
an’, an’--oh! Father Tom, don’t ax me; I’ve got an oath on my lips.
[_Music._] Don’t be hard on a poor boy.

_Father T_ I lift the oath from ye. Tell me, avick, oh! tell me. Did ye
search for the poor thing--the darlin’ soft-eyed Colleen? Oh, Myles!
could ye lave her to lie in the cowld lake all alone?

_Enter_ EILY _from door_ R. _flat_.

_Myles_ No, I couldn’t.

_Father T_ [_Turns--sees_ EILY.] Eily! Is it yourself, and alive--an’
not--not--Oh! Eily, mavourneen. Come to my heart.

[_Embraces_ EILY.

_Myles_ [_Crosses to_ L.] D’ye think ye’d see me alive if she wasn’t? I
thought ye knew me better--it’s at the bottom of the Pool a Dhiol I’d
be this minute if she wasn’t to the fore.

_Father T_ [C.] Speak to me--let me hear your voice.

_Eily_ Oh, father, father! won’t ye take me far, far away from this
place?

_Father T_ Why did ye hide yourself this way?

_Eily_ For fear _he’d_ see me.

_Father T_ Hardress? You knew then that he instigated Danny to get rid
of ye?

_Eily_ Why didn’t I die--why am I alive now for him to hate me?

_Father T_ D’ye know that in a few hours he is going to marry another?

_Eily_ I know it. Myles tould me--that’s why I’m hiding myself.

_Father T_ What does she mean?

_Myles_ [L.] She loves him still--that’s what she manes.

_Father T_ Love the wretch who sought your life!

_Eily_ Isn’t it his own? It isn’t his fault if his love couldn’t last
as long as mine. I was a poor, mane creature--not up to him any way;
but if he’d only said, “Eily, put the grave between us and make me
happy,” sure I’d lain down, wid a big heart, in the loch.

_Father T_ And you are willing to pass a life of seclusion that he may
live in his guilty joy?

_Eily_ If I was alive wouldn’t I be a shame to him an’ a ruin--ain’t
I in his way? Heaven help me--why would I trouble him? Oh! he was in
great pain o’ mind entirely when he let them put a hand on me--the poor
darlin’.

_Father T_ And you mean to let him believe you dead?

_Eily_ Dead an’ gone: then, perhaps, his love for me will come back,
and the thought of his poor, foolish little Eily that worshiped the
ground he stood on, will fill his heart a while.

_Father T_ And where will you go?

_Eily_ I don’t know. Anywhere. What matters?

_Myles_ [_Against wing_, L.] Love makes all places alike.

_Eily_ I am alone in the world now.

_Father T_ The villain--the monster! He sent her to heaven because he
wanted her there to blot out with her tears the record of his iniquity.
Eily, ye have but one home, and that’s my poor house. You are not alone
in the world--there’s one beside ye, your father, and that’s myself.

_Myles_ Two--bad luck to me, two. I am her mother; sure I brought her
into the world a second time.

_Father T_ [_Looking_, R.] Whisht! look down there, Myles--what’s that
on the road?

_Myles_ [_Crosses_ R.] It’s the sogers--a company of red-coats. What
brings the army out?--who’s that wid them?--it is ould Corrigan, and
they are going towards Castle Chute. There’s mischief in the wind.

_Father T_ In with you, an’ keep close a while; I’ll go down to the
castle and see what’s the matter. [_Crosses_ R.

_Eily_ Promise me that you’ll not betray me--that none but your self
and Myles shall ever know I’m livin; promise me that before you go.

_Father T_ I do, Eily; I’ll never breathe a word of it--it is as sacred
as an oath. [_Exit_ L.--_music_.

_Eily_ [_Going to cottage._] Shut me in, Myles, and take the key wid
ye, this time. [_Exit in cottage_, R. C.

_Myles_ [_Locks door._] There ye are like a pearl in an oyster; now
I’ll go to my bed as usual on the mountain above--the bolster is
stuffed wid rocks, and I’ll have a cloud round me for a blanket.

[_Exit_ MYLES, R. 2 E.


SCENE IV.--_Outside of Castle Chute._ [_1st grooves._]

_Enter_ CORRIGAN _and six_ SOLDIERS, R. 1 E.

_Corrig_ Quietly, boys; sthrew yourselves round the wood--some of ye at
the gate beyant--two more this way--watch the windies; if he’s there to
escape at all, he’ll jump from a windy. The house is surrounded.

_Quadrille music under stage.--Air, “The Boulanger.”_

Oh, oh! they’re dancin’--dancin’ and merry-making, while the net is
closin’ around ’em. Now Masther Hardress Cregan--I was kicked out, was
I; but I’ll come this time wid a call that ye’ll answer wid your head
instead of your foot. My letters were returned unopened; but here’s a
bit of writin’ that ye’ll not be able to hand back so easy.

_Enter_ CORPORAL, R.

_Corp_ All right, sir.

_Corrig_ Did you find the woman, as I told ye?

_Corp_ Here she is, sir.

_Enter_ SHEELAH, _guarded by two_ SOLDIERS, R.

_Sheelah_ [_Crying._] What’s this? Why am I thrated this way--what have
I done?

_Corrig_ You are wanted a while--it’s your testimony we require. Bring
her this way. Follow me! [_Exit_, L.

_Sheelah_ [_Struggling._] Let me go back to my boy. Ah! good luck
t’ye, don’t kape me from my poor boy! [_Struggling._] Oh! you dirty
blackguards, let me go--let me go!

[_Exit_ SHEELAH _and_ SOLDIERS, L.


  SCENE V.--_Ball Room in Castle Chute. Steps,_ C.;
  _platform--balustrade on top, backed by moonlight landscape--doors_
  R. _and_ L.; _table_ L. C.; _writing materials, books, papers, etc.,
  on it; chairs; chair_ L. 2 E., _chairs_ R.; _chandeliers lighted_.
  LADIES _and_ GENTLEMEN, WEDDING GUESTS _discovered_, HYLAND CREAGH,
  BERTIE O’MOORE, DUCIE, KATHLEEN CREAGH, ADA CREAGH, PATSIE O’MOORE,
  BRIDESMAIDS _and_ SERVANTS _discovered.--Music going on under stage._

_Hyland_ Ducie, they are dancing the Boulanger, and they can’t see the
figure unless you lend them the light of your eyes.

_Kathleen_ We have danced enough; it is nearly seven o’clock.

_Ducie_ Mr. O’Moore; when is the ceremony to commence?

_O’Moore_ The execution is fixed for seven--here’s the scaffold, I
presume. [_Points to table._

_Hyland_ Hardress looks like a criminal. I’ve seen him fight three
duels, and he never showed such a pale face as he exhibits to-night.

_Ducie_ He looks as if he was frightened at being so happy.

_Hyland_ And Kyrle Daly wears as gay an appearance.

_Enter_ KYRLE DALY _down steps_, C.

_Ducie_ Hush! here he is.

_Kyrle_ That need not stop your speech, Hyland. I don’t hide my love
for Anne Chute, and it is my pride, and no fault of mine if she has
found a better man.

_Hyland_ He is not a better man.

_Kyrle_ He is--she thinks so--what she says becomes the truth.

_Enter_ MRS. CREGAN, L. 2 E.

_Mrs. C_ Who says the days of chivalry are over? Come, gentlemen, the
bridesmaids must attend the bride. The guests will assemble in the hall.

_Enter_ SERVANT, R. 2 E., _with letter and card on salver_.

_Serv_ Mr. Bertie O’Moore, if you plase. A gentlemen below asked me to
hand you this card.

_O’Moore_ A gentleman! what can he want? [_Reads card._] Ah! indeed;
this is a serious matter, and excuses the intrusion.

_Hyland_ What’s the matter?

_O’Moore_ A murder has been committed.

_All_ A murder?

_O’Moore_ The perpetrator of the deed has been discovered, and the
warrant for his arrest requires my signature.

_Hyland_ Hang the rascal. [_Goes up with_ DUCIE.

_O’Moore_ A magistrate, like a doctor, is called on at all hours.

_Mrs. C_ We can excuse you for such a duty, Mr. O’Moore.

_O’Moore_ [_Crossing_, R.] This is the result of some brawl at a fair,
I suppose. Is Mr. Corrigan below?

_Mrs. C_ [_Starting._] Corrigan?

_O’Moore_ Show me to him.

[_Exit_ O’MOORE _and_ SERVANT, R. 2 E.--GUESTS _go up and off_, L. U.
E.

_Mrs. C_ Corrigan here! What brings that man to this house?

[_Exit_ MRS. CREGAN, R. 3 E.

_Enter_ HARDRESS, _down steps_, C. _from_ R., _pale_.

_Hardress_ [_Sits_, L.] It is in vain--I can not repress the terror
with which I approach these nuptials--yet, what have I to fear? Oh! my
heart is bursting with its load of misery.

_Enter_ ANNE, _down steps_, C. _from_ R.

_Anne_ Hardress! what is the matter with you?

_Hard_ [_Rising_, L. C.] I will tell you--yes, it may take this
horrible oppression from my heart. At one time I thought you knew my
secret: I was mistaken. The girl you saw at Muckross Head--

_Anne_ [R. C.] Eily O’Connor?

_Hard_ Was my wife!

_Anne_ Your wife?

_Hard_ Hush! Maddened with the miseries this act brought upon me, I
treated her with cruelty--she committed suicide.

_Anne_ Merciful powers!

_Hard_ She wrote to me bidding me farewell forever, and the next day
her cloak was found floating in the lake. [ANNE _sinks in chair_.]
Since then I have neither slept nor waked--I have but one thought, one
feeling; my love for her, wild and maddened, has come back upon my
heart like a vengeance.

[_Music--tumult heard_, R.

_Anne_ Heaven defend our hearts, what is that?

[_Enter_ MRS. CREGAN, _deadly pale_. R. 3 E.--_Locks door behind her._

_Mrs. C_ Hardress! my child!

_Hard_ Mother!

_Anne_ Mother, he is here. Look on him--speak to him--do not gasp and
stare on your son in that horrid way. Oh, mother! speak, or you will
break my heart.

_Mrs. C_ Fly--fly! [HARDRESS _going_, R.] Not that way. No--the
doors are defended! there is a soldier placed at every entrance!
You--are trapped and caught--what shall we do?--the window in my
chamber--come--come--quick--quick!

_Anne_ Of what is he accused!

_Hard_ Of murder. I see it in her face. [_Noise_, R.

_Mrs. C_ Hush! they come--begone! Your boat is below that window. Don’t
speak! when oceans are between you and danger--write! Till then not a
word. [_Forcing him off_, R. 3 E.--_noise_, R.

_Anne_ Accused of murder! He is innocent!

_Mrs. C_ Go to your room! Go quickly to your room, you will betray
him--you can’t command your features.

_Anne_ Dear mother, I will.

_Mrs. C_ Away, I say--you will drive me frantic, girl. My brain is
stretched to cracking! Ha! [_Noise_, R.

_Anne_ There is a tumult in the drawing-room.

_Mrs. C_ They come! You tremble! Go--take away your puny love; hide it
where it will not injure him--leave me to face this danger!

_Anne_ He is not guilty.

_Mrs. C_ What’s that to me, woman? I am his mother--the hunters are
after my blood! Sit there--look away from this door. They come!

  [_Knocking loudly--crash--door_ R. 3 E. _opened--enter_ CORPORAL
  _and_ SOLDIERS, _who cross stage, facing up to charge_--GENTLEMEN
  _with drawn swords on steps_, C.; LADIES _on at back_--O’MOORE, R. 3
  E.--_enter_ CORRIGAN, R. 3 E.--KYRLE _on steps_, C.

_Corrig_ Gentlemen, put up your swords; the house is surrounded by a
military force, and we are here in the king’s name.

_Anne_ [R.] Gentlemen, come on, there was a time in Ireland when
neither king nor faction could call on Castle Chute without a bloody
welcome.

_Guests_ Clear them out!

_Kyrle_ [_Interposing._] Anne, are you mad? Put up your swords--stand
back there--speak--O’Moore, what does this strange outrage mean?

[SOLDIERS _fall back_--GENTLEMEN _on steps_; KYRLE _comes forward_.

_O’Moore_ Mrs. Cregan, a fearful charge is made against your son; I
know--I believe he is innocent; I suggest, then, that the matter be
investigated here at once, amongst his friends, so that this scandal
may be crushed in its birth.

_Kyrle_ Where is Hardress?

_Corrig_ Where?--why, he’s escaping while we are jabbering here. Search
the house. [_Exit two_ SOLDIERS, R. 3 E.

_Mrs. C_ [L.] Must we submit to this, sir? Will you, a magistrate,
permit--

_O’Moore_ I regret Mrs. Cregan, but as a form--

_Mrs. C_ Go on, sir!

_Corrig_ [_At door_, L. 3 E.] What room is this? ’tis locked--

_Mrs. C_ That is my sleeping chamber.

_Corrig_ My duty compels me--

_Mrs. C_ [_Throws key down on ground._] Be it so, sir.

_Corrig_ [_Picks up key--unlocks door._] She had the key--he’s there.

[_Exit_ CORPORAL _and two_ SOLDIERS.

_Mrs. C_ He has escaped by this time.

_O’Moore_ [_At_ L. _table_.] I hope Miss Chute will pardon me for my
share in this transaction--believe me, I regret--

_Anne_ Don’t talk to me of your regret, while you are doing your worst.
It is hate, not justice, that brings this accusation against Hardress,
and this disgrace upon me.

_Kyrle_ Anne!

_Anne_ Hold _your_ tongue--his life’s in danger, and if I can’t love
him, I’ll fight for him, and that’s more than any of you men can do.
[_To_ O’MOORE.] Go on with your dirty work. You have done the worst
now--you have dismayed our guests, scattered terror amid our festival,
and made the remembrance of this night, which should have been a happy
one, a thought of gloom and shame.

_Mrs. C_ Hark! I hear--I hear his voice. It can not be.

_Re-enter_ CORRIGAN, L. 3 E.

_Corrig_ The prisoner is here!

_Mrs. C_ [C.] Ah, [_Utters a cry._] is he? Dark bloodhound, have you
found him? May the tongue that tells me so be withered from the roots,
and the eye that first detected him be darkened in its socket!

_Kyrle_ Oh, madam! for heaven’s sake!

_Anne_ Mother! mother!

_Mrs. C_ What! shall it be for nothing he has stung the mother’s heart,
and set her brain on fire?

_Enter_ HARDRESS, _handcuffed, and two_ SOLDIERS, L. 3 E.

I tell you that my tongue may hold its peace, but there is not a vein
in all my frame but curses him. [_Turns--sees_ HARDRESS; _falls on his
breast_.] My boy! my boy!

_Hard_ [L.] Mother, I entreat you to be calm. [_Crosses to_ C.] Kyrle,
there are my hands, do you think there is blood upon them?

[KYRLE _seizes his hand_--GENTLEMEN _press round him, take his hand,
and retire up_.

_Hard_ I thank you, gentlemen; your hands acquit me. Mother, be
calm--sit there. [_Points to chair_, L.

_Anne_ Come here, Hardress; your place is here by me.

_Hard_ [R. C.] Now, sir, I am ready.

_Corrig_ [L. _of table_.] I will lay before you, sir, the deposition
upon which the warrant issues against the prisoner. Here is the
confession of Daniel or Danny Mann, a person in the service of the
accused, taken on his death-bed--in articulo mortis, you’ll observe.

_O’Moore_ But not witnessed.

_Corrig_ [_Calling._] Bring in that woman.

_Enter_ SHEELAH _and two_ SOLDIERS, R. 3 E.

I have witnesses. Your worship will find the form of the law in perfect
shape.

_O’Moore_ Read the confession, sir.

_Corrig_ [_Reads._] “The deponent being on his death-bed, in the
presence of Sheelah Mann and Thomas O’Brien, parish priest of Kinmare,
deposed and said”--

_Enter_ FATHER TOM, R. 3 E.

Oh, you are come in time, sir.

_Father T_ I hope I am.

_Corrig_ We may have to call your evidence.

_Father T_ [C.] I have brought it with me.

_Corrig_ “Deposed and said, that he, deponent, killed Eily O’Connor;
that said Eily was the wife of Hardress Cregan, and stood in the way
of his marriage with Miss Anne Chute; deponent offered to put away the
girl, and his master employed him to do so.”

_O’Moore_ Sheelah, did Danny confess this crime?

_Sheelah_ [L. C.] Divil a word--it’s a lie from end to end; that ould
thief was niver in my cabin--he invented the whole of it--sure you’re
the divil’s own parverter of the truth.

_Corrig_ Am I? Oh, oh! Father Tom will scarcely say as much? [_To
him._] Did Danny Mann confess this in your presence?

_Father T_ I decline to answer that question!

_Corrig_ Aha! you must--the law will compel you!

_Father T_ I’d like to see the law that can unseal the lips of the
priest, and make him reveal the secrets of heaven.

_Anne_ So much for your two witnesses. Ladies, stand close. Gentlemen,
give us room here.

[BRIDESMAIDS _down_, R. _Exit_ FATHER TOM, R. 3 E.

_Corrig_ We have abundant proof, your worship--enough to hang a whole
country. Danny isn’t dead yet. Deponent agreed with Cregan that if the
deed was to be done, that he, Cregan, should give his glove as a token.

_Mrs. C_ Ah!

_Hard_ Hold! I confess that what he has read is true. Danny did make
the offer, and I repelled his horrible proposition.

_Corrig_ Aha! but you gave him the glove.

_Hard_ Never, by my immortal soul--never!

_Mrs. C_ [_Advancing._] But _I_--_I_ did! [_Movement of surprise._] _I_
your wretched mother--I gave it to him--I am guilty! thank heaven for
that! remove those bonds from his hands and put them here on mine.

_Hard_ ’Tis false, mother, you did not know his purpose--you could not
know it. [CORPORAL _takes off handcuffs_.

_Mrs. C_ I will not say anything that takes the welcome guilt from off
me.

_Enter_ MYLES _from steps_, C. _from_ R.

_Myles_ Won’t ye, ma’am? Well, if ye won’t, I will.

_All_ Myles!

_Myles_ Save all here. If you plaze, I’d like to say a word; there’s
been a murder done, and I done it.

_All_ You!

_Myles_ Myself. Danny was killed by my hand. [_To_ CORRIG.] Were yez
any way nigh that time?

_Corrig_ [_Quickly._] No.

_Myles_ [_Quickly._] That’s lucky; then take down what I’m sayin’. I
shot the poor boy--but widout manin’ to hurt him. It’s lucky I killed
him that time, for it’s lifted a mighty sin off the sowl of the crature.

_O’Moore_ What does he mean?

_Myles_ I mane, that if you found one witness to Eily O’Connor’s death,
I found another that knows a little more about it, and here she is.

_Enter_ EILY _and_ FATHER TOM _down steps_, C. _from_ R.

_All_ Eily!

_Myles_ The Colleen Bawn herself!

_Eily_ Hardress!             }

_Hard_ My wife--my own Eily. }

_Eily_ Here, darlin’, take the paper, and tear it if you like.

[_Offers him the certificate._

_Hard_ Eily, I could not live without you.

_Mrs. C_ If ever he blamed you, it was my foolish pride spoke in his
hard words--he loves you with all his heart. Forgive me, Eily.

_Eily_ Forgive!

_Mrs. C_ Forgive your mother, Eily.

_Eily_ [_Embracing her._] Mother!

  [MRS. CREGAN, HARDRESS, EILY, FATHER TOM, _group together_--ANNE,
  KYRLE, _and_ GENTLEMEN--LADIES _together_--_their backs to_
  CORRIGAN--CORRIGAN _takes bag, puts in papers, looks about, puts
  on hat, buttons coat, slinks up stage, runs up stairs, and off_
  R.--MYLES _points off after him--several_ GENTLEMEN _run after_
  CORRIGAN.

_Anne_ But what’s to become of me? is all my emotion to be summoned for
nothing? Is my wedding dress to go to waste, and here’s all my blushes
ready? I must have a husband.

_Hyland and Gentlemen_ Take me.

_O’Moore_ Take me.

_Anne_ Don’t all speak at once! Where’s Mr. Daly?

_Kyrle_ [R.] Here I am, Anne!

_Anne_ [R. C.] Kyrle, come here! You said you loved me, and I think you
do.

_Kyrle_ Oh!

_Anne_ Behave yourself now. If you’ll ask me, I’ll have you.

_Kyrle_ [_Embracing_ ANNE.] Anne! [_Shouts outside_, L. U. E.

_All_ What’s that?

_Myles_ [_Looking off out at back._] Don’t be uneasy! it’s only the
boys outside that’s caught ould Corrigan thryin’ to get off, and
they’ve got him in the horse-pond.

_Kyrle_ They’ll drown him.

_Myles_ Niver fear, he wasn’t born to be drowned--he won’t sink--he’ll
rise out of the world, and divil a fut nearer heaven he’ll get than the
top o’ the gallows.

_Eily_ [_To_ HARD.] And ye won’t be ashamed of me?

_Anne_ I’ll be ashamed of him if he does.

_Eily_ And when I spake--no--speak--

_Anne_ Spake is the right sound. Kyrle Daly, pronounce that word.

_Kyrle_ That’s right; if you ever spake it any other way I’ll divorce
ye--mind that.

_Father T_ Eily, darlin’, in the middle of your joy, sure you would not
forget one who never forsook you in your sorrow.

_Eily_ Oh, Father Tom!

_Father T_ Oh, it’s not myself I mane.

_Anne_ No, it’s that marauder there, that lent me his top coat in the
thunder storm. [_Pointing to_ MYLES.

_Myles_ Bedad, ma’am, your beauty left a linin’ in it that has kept me
warm ever since.

_Eily_ Myles, you saved my life--it belongs to you. There’s my
hand--what will you do with it?

_Myles_ [_Takes her hand and_ HARDRESS’S.] Take her, wid all my heart.
I may say that, for ye can’t take her without. I am like the boy who
had a penny to put in the poor-box--I’d rather keep it for myself. It’s
a shamrock itself ye have got, sir; and like that flower she’ll come up
every year fresh and green foreninst ye. When ye cease to love her may
dyin’ become ye, and when ye _do_ die, lave yer money to the poor, your
widdy to me, and we’ll both forgive ye.

[_Joins hands._

_Eily_ I’m only a poor simple girl, and it’s frightened I am to be
surrounded by so many--

_Anne_ Friends, Eily, friends.

_Eily_ Oh, if I could think so--if I could hope that I had established
myself in a little corner of their hearts, there wouldn’t be a happier
girl alive than THE COLLEEN BAWN.

        SOLDIERS.                                    SOLDIERS.
  GUESTS.                                                GUESTS.
                                                      HYLAND.
                                                O’MOORE.   SHEELAH.
  KYRLE. ANNE. MYLES. HARDRESS. EILY. FATHER TOM. MRS. CREGAN.
        R.                                         L.


THE END.




Beautiful Woman.


  “The world was sad--the garden was a wild;
  “And Man the Hermit sighed, till Woman smiled.”

Who would not be Beautiful? Those who are beautiful by nature, can make
themselves more bewitching with


Hagan’s Magnolia Balm.

Those who are not thus gifted can add greatly to their attractions by
its use.

=Madame de Stael= said she would gladly give up the power conferred
by her intellectual position, if she could thereby purchase beauty.
Throughout all time MAN has done homage to Beauty, and bestowed upon
_Beautiful Woman_ his life’s devotion and adoration.

Nature has not been so lavish of her gifts in this direction, as some
of the fair Daughters of Eve may desire. Many lack the first great
essential of loveliness, =a Fresh and Blooming Complexion=.

Without it, all other beauties are marred; with it, the plainest
features soften into refinement and glow with loveliness. _Hagan’s
Magnolia Balm_ produces this effect and gives to the Complexion the


FRESHNESS OF YOUTH.

If you wish to get rid of =Redness=, =Blotches=, =Pimples=, =etc.=, you
should use this delightful article.

It is what Actresses, Opera Singers and Ladies of fashions use to
create that _distingue_ appearance so much admired by every one.

By its use the roughest skin is made to rival the pure radiant texture
of =Youthful Beauty=.

Hagan’s Magnolia Balm overcomes the flushed appearance caused by =heat,
fatigue and excitement=, makes the eye look clear, full and bright,
and imparts a genial, lively expression to the countenance, indicating
intellectual power and natural grace.

Ladies exposed to the summer sun, or spring winds, causing =Tan,
Sunburn and Freckles=, will find this Balm of great value, as it
removes these defects by a few applications. In fact this article
is the great =Secret of Beauty=; no Lady who values a =Youthful=
appearance can do without it.

It makes a =Lady of Thirty appear but Twenty=; and so natural, gradual
and perfect are its effects, that no person can detect its application.

The Magnolia Balm transforms the Rustic Country Girl into a City Belle,
more rapidly than any other one thing.

Applied to the =Neck, Arms and Hands=, it imparts an appearance of
=graceful rotundity and engaging plumpness=, as well as a =pearly
blooming purity=, which is ever the admiration of the opposite sex.
When used upon the person it exhales a subdued fragrance, suggesting
pure habits and a cultivated taste.

The Magnolia Balm contains nothing in the least injurious to the skin.

The patronage awarded the Magnolia Balm by fashionable ladies of New
York, Opera Singers and Actresses, and its rapidly growing demand,
induces us to recommend it with unbounded confidence. It costs but =75
Cents per bottle=, and is sold by all Druggists, Perfumers and General
Stores. Originally prepared by WM. E. HAGAN, TROY, N. Y.


  LYON MANUFACTURING CO.,
  53 Broadway, New York.




Lyon’s Kathairon.


  For Preserving and Beautifying the Human Hair. To Prevent its Falling
  Out and Turning Gray.

A well preserved Head of Hair, in a person of middle age, at once
bespeaks refinement, elegance, health and beauty. It may truly be
called Woman’s Crowning Glory, while men are not insensible to its
advantages and charms. Few things are more disgusting than thin,
frizzly, harsh, untamed Hair, with head and coat covered with Dandruff.
Visit a barber and you feel and look like a new man. This is what
=LYON’S KATHAIRON= will do all the time. The charm which lies in well
placed Hair, Glossy Curls, Luxuriant Tresses, and a Clean Head, is
noticeable and irresistible.

The Ladies, (who are the best judges of what pertains to beauty and
adornment,) are getting to understand the value and importance of a
fine Head of Hair. Thus, we see that more and more attention is paid to
the Culture, Growth and Preservation of the Hair by both sexes. Women
are not alone in the desire to improve their Tresses.

Barber shops and hair dressing saloons multiply in number, and Ladies’
hair dressing is fast becoming a fine art.

And thus the demand for LYON’S KATHAIRON constantly increases, and
every day adds new testimony to its very great value.

Do you ask why? For the following reasons: (More could be given, but
these ought to be satisfactory to start with.)

  =Because it increases the Growth and Beauty of the Hair.=
  =Because it is a Delightful Dressing.=
  =Because it Eradicates Dandruff.=
  =Because it Prevents the Hair from Falling Out.=
  =Because it Prevents the Hair from Turning Gray.=
  =Because it Keeps the Head Cool and heals Pimples.=
  =Because it gives the Hair a rich, soft, glossy appearance.=

The now widely celebrated Kathairon, was first discovered and
introduced to the public in 1848, by Prof. E. Thomas Lyon, a graduate
of Princeton College, N. J. The name is derived from the Greek,
“_Kathro_,” or “_Kathairo_,” signifying to cleanse, purify, rejuvenate,
or restore. The favor it has received and the popularity it has
obtained, is unprecedented and incredible. It was found to be not only
a beautiful Dressing for the Hair, but to act medicinally upon the head
in cleansing it of Scurf and Dandruff, and restoring Hair upon Bald
Heads.

_Baldness_ is an American peculiarity so often witnessed, that
many candidly suppose it _constitutional, hereditary, or a natural
exhaustion of the powers of nature_. It is frequently caused by wearing
a too thick covering upon the Head; by straining the Hair too hard
in parting, and by neglecting to clean the Scalp from Dandruff and
other impurities. A free use of Kathairon will entirely obviate this
difficulty, as its cleansing and purifying properties immediately
remove all these impurities. We are confident in saying that _in every
case_ (except where the Hair is entirely dead, _which very seldom
exists_,) a continued application of the KATHAIRON _will restore the
Hair to its former Strength and Vigor_.


To Prevent the Hair from coming out, USE LYON’S KATHAIRON.

  It is a most delightful Hair Dressing.
  It eradicates scurf and dandruff.
  It keeps the head cool and clean.
  It makes the hair rich, soft and glossy.
  It prevents hair from turning gray and falling off.
  It restores hair upon premature bald heads.

The above is just what Lyon’s Kathairon will do. It is pretty--it is
cheap--durable. It is literally sold by the car-load, and yet the
almost incredible demand is daily increasing, until there is hardly a
country store that does not keep it, or a family that does not use it.
All Druggists sell it. Price, in large bottles, 50 cents.


  Lyon Manufacturing Co., New York.




Transcriber's Note


The following apparent errors have been corrected:


p. 5 "vulgularly" changed to "vulgarly"

p. 10 "_Miles_" changed to "_Myles_"

p. 10 "_Myles._" changed to "_Myles_"

p. 19 "it her" changed to "it in her"

p. 19 "he brazen" changed to "he’d brazen"

p. 22 "[_Aside_]" changed to "[_Aside._]"

p. 24 "DANNY" changed to "DANNY."

p. 25 "_Danny._" changed to "_Danny_"

p. 25 "_Eily._" changed to "_Eily_"

p. 26 "_Staggering_" changed to "_Staggering._"

p. 26 "_Anne._" changed to "_Anne_"

p. 30 "dyin,’" changed to "dyin’,"

p. 31 "_Going up_" changed to "_Going up._"

p. 31 "SHEEELAH" changed to "SHEELAH"

p. 32 "Muckrose" changed to "Muckross"

p. 32 "Make" changed to "Made"

p. 33 "Conccals" changed to "Conceals"

p. 33 "_Annie_" changed to "_Anne_"

p. 35 "matter" changed to "matter."

p. 36 "t’ye. don’t" changed to "t’ye, don’t"

p. 36 "DUCIA" changed to "DUCIE"

p. 37 "commence" changed to "commence?"

p. 37 "_Ducia_" changed to "_Ducie_"

p. 37 "O’Conner" changed to "O’Connor"

p. 38 "_Hard._" changed to "_Hard_"

p. 39 "3 E" changed to "3 E."

p. 40 "3" changed to "3 E."

p. 40 "do so." changed to "do so.”"


Inconsistent spelling and punctuation have otherwise been left as
printed.








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COLLEEN BAWN; OR, THE BRIDES OF GARRYOWEN ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


